=== PAGE 131 ===
■ 2°/3°:  Caused by ↓ ACTH production by the pituitary gland or ↓ CRH 
production by the hypothalamus; most often caused by cessation of long-
term glucocorticoid treatment (often during higher doses and longer dura-
tion of therapy).
History/PE
■ Most symptoms are nonspecific.
■ Weakness, fatigue, and anorexia with weight loss are common.
■ Hyperpigmentation (caused by ↑ ACTH secretion) and non–anion gap 
metabolic acidosis (caused by ↓ aldosterone deficiency) is seen in Addison 
disease.
■ Hypotension, confusion, and coma is seen in acute adrenal crisis (eg, stop -
ping long-term steroids).
Diagnosis
■ Lab tests:  Hypoglycemia, electrolyte imbalances (see Table 2.3-11).
■ 8 am  plasma cortisol levels and ACTH levels (see Table 2.3-11). An 8 am 
plasma cortisol level < 3 μg/dL in the absence of exogenous glucocorti-
coid administration is diagnostic of AI.
■ A synthetic ACTH stimulation (cosyntropin) test is the test of choice if morn -
ing cortisol levels are nondiagnostic. Failure of cortisol to rise >   20 μg/dL 
following ACTH administration confirms the diagnosis.
trEatmEnt
■ 1°:  Glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid replacement.
■ 2°/3°:  Only glucocorticoid replacement is necessary (mineralocorticoid 
production is not ACTH dependent).
■ Acute adrenal crisis:  Provide IV steroids, correct electrolyte abnormalities 
as needed, provide 50% dextrose to correct hypoglycemia, and initiate 
aggressive volume resuscitation.
■ ↑  Steroids during periods of stress (eg, major surgery, trauma, infection).
■ In patients on chronic steroid therapy, taper slowly to prevent 2°/3° AI .
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA
A tumor of chromaffin tissue that secretes catecholamines and is found either 
in the adrenal medulla or in extra-adrenal sites. Most commonly associated 
with MEN 2A and 2B.
History/PE
■ Presents with paroxysmal tachycardia, palpitations, chest pain, diaphoresis, 
hypertension, headache, tremor, and anxiety.
■ Obtain a family history to rule out genetic causes of pheochromocytoma 
(eg, MEN 2A/2B, von Hippel–Lindau disease, neurofibromatosis).
 KEY FACT
1° AI is associated with ↑ skin 
pigmentation, ↓ glucocorticoids, and 
↓ mineralocorticoids. 2° AI is only 
associated with ↓ glucocorticoids and 
does not have skin pigmentation or 
hyperkalemia.
 MNEMONIC
The 4 S’s of adrenal crisis 
management—
Salt: 0.9% saline
Steroids: IV hydrocortisone 100 mg every 
8 hours
Support
Search for the underlying illness
 KEY FACT
Do not delay the administration of 
steroids in a patient with suspected AI.
 MNEMONIC
Pheochromocytoma rule of 10’s—
10% Extra-adrenal
10% Bilateral
10% Malignant
10% Occur in children
10% Familial
cortisoL aLdosterone acth sodiuM PotassiuM
1° Adrenal 
insufficiency
↓ ↓ ↑ ↓ ↑ ↑
2°/3° Adrenal 
insufficiency
↓ Normal ↓ Nl/↓ Nl
TABLE 2.3-11.  L aboratory Findings in Adrenal Insufficiency
114 ENDOCRINOLOGYHIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.03_Step2CK_Endo_10e_089-118.indd   114 8/28/18   12:37 PM

=== PAGE 132 ===
Diagnosis
■ Best initial test:  Look for ↑ 24-hour urine metanephrines and catechol-
amines or plasma-fractionated metanephrines.
■ Imaging (only after labs):  CT or MRI of adrenal glands (see Figure 2.3-21). 
A nuclear metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) scan can localize extra-adrenal 
lesions and metastatic disease.
trEatmEnt
■ Surgical resection.
■ Preoperatively, use α-adrenergic blockade first (phenoxybenzamine) to 
control hypertension, followed by β-blockade to control tachycardia. 
Never give β-blockade first, as unopposed α-adrenergic stimulation can 
lead to severe hypertension.
HYPERALDOSTERONISM
Results from excessive secretion of aldosterone from the zona glomerulosa 
of the adrenal cortex. It is usually caused by bilateral adrenocortical hyper-
plasia (60–70%) but can also result from unilateral adrenal adenoma (Conn 
syndrome).
History/PE
■ Presents with hypertension, headache, polyuria, and muscle weakness 
(caused by hypokalemia).
■ Consider hyperaldosteronism in younger adults who are diagnosed with 
hypertension without risk factors or a family history of hypertension
.
Diagnosis
■ Lab tests:  Hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, hypomagnesemia, hyperaldo-
steronism, ↑ aldosterone-to-plasma renin activity ratio (usually > 30).
■ Imaging:  Only after labs. CT or MRI may reveal an adrenal mass.
■ Adrenal venous sampling (will show ↑ aldosterone) may be needed to 
localize the adenoma or to confirm bilateral adrenal hyperplasia.
trEatmEnt
■ Adenoma:  Surgical resection (after correction of BP and potassium).
■ Bilateral hyperplasia: Aldosterone receptor antagonist (eplerenone pre-
ferred over spironolactone as has fewer side effects).
 MNEMONIC
The 5 P’s of pheochromocytoma—
Pressure (BP)
Pain (headache)
Perspiration
Palpitations
Pallor
 KEY FACT
In pheochromocytoma, administer 
α-blockers before β-blockers to prevent 
hypertensive crisis.
A 23-year-old man with a history of 
schizophrenia presents with complaints 
of fatigue, weakness, cramps, and 
headache for the past several days. He 
denies any other symptoms, although 
he had to urinate several times while 
in the office. Routine labs reveal 
hyponatremia. With water deprivation, 
his urine osmolality ↑. What is the most 
likely diagnosis?
1
An asymptomatic 36-year-old woman 
presents with a 2-cm thyroid mass. 
TFTs are unremarkable, but FNA 
reveals medullary carcinoma. Total 
thyroidectomy with thyroid hormone 
replacement is recommended. What 
is the most important screening test 
to perform prior to surgery? 
2
FIGURE 2.3-21.  Pheochromocytoma. (A) MRI showing left suprarenal mass (arrow). (B) Pheochromocytoma post-
surgical resection. (Reproduced with permission from Roghi A, et al. Adrenergic myocarditis in pheochromocytoma. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson. 2011;13:4.)
A
 B
115ENDOCRINOLOGY HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.03_Step2CK_Endo_10e_089-118.indd   115 8/28/18   12:37 PM

=== PAGE 133 ===
CONGENITAL ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA
Inherited enzyme defects that impair cortisol synthesis and result in the 
accumulation of cortisol precursors. Most cases are caused by 21-hydroxylase 
deficiency (95%, autosomal recessive), but other causes include 11- and 
17-hydroxylase deficiencies.
History/PE
See Table 2.3-12.
Diagnosis
■ Lab tests:  Electrolyte abnormalities (see Table 2.3-12). In severe cases, 
mineralocorticoid deficiency may lead to life-threatening salt wasting.
■ Elevated serum 17-hydroxyprogesterone level is diagnostic of 21-hydroxylase 
deficiency.
trEatmEnt
■ Immediate fluid resuscitation and salt repletion. Administer cortisol to ↓ 
ACTH and adrenal androgens. Fludrocortisone is appropriate for severe 
21-hydroxylase deficiency.
■ Possible surgical correction of ambiguous genitalia.
■ Refer to the Gynecology chapter for information on the diagnosis and 
treatment of late-onset CAH.
 KEY FACT
Congenital aromatase deficiency will 
present similarly to CAH in female 
newborns with external virilization and 
ambiguous external genitalia. However, 
the patient will have no electrolyte or 
blood pressure abnormalities.
1° (psychogenic) polydipsia, a 
condition in which patients consume 
large volumes of fluid, resulting in 
polyuria. It most often occurs in 
patients with psychiatric disorders. 
Patients present with symptoms 
similar to DI, but following a water 
deprivation test, urine osmolality 
↑ (vs DI, in which urine remains dilute).
1
VMA and metanephrines. Medullary 
carcinoma of the thyroid is associated 
with MEN type 2A/2B, an autosomal 
dominant condition that predisposes 
patients not only to medullary 
carcinoma but also to parathyroid 
adenomas and pheochromocytomas. 
Screening for pheochromocytoma 
with urine VMA and metanephrines 
prior to surgery can prevent potentially 
life-threatening hypertensive crises 
during thyroidectomy.
2
enzyMe deficiency MineraLocorticoids cortisoL
sex 
horMones bP [K +] Laboratory tests Presentation
17α-hydroxylasea ↑ ↓ ↓ ↑ ↓ ↓ Androstenedione XY: pseudoher-
maphroditism 
(ambiguous geni-
talia, undescended 
testes)
XX: lack sec-
ondary sexual 
development
21-hydroxylase
a ↓ ↓ ↑ ↓ ↑ ↑ Renin activity
↑ 17-hydroxyprogesterone
↓ Sodium
↓ Chloride
Most common
Presents in infancy 
(salt wasting) or 
childhood (preco-
cious puberty)
XX: virilization
11β-hydroxylase
a ↓ Aldosterone
↑ 11-deoxycorticosterone 
(results in ↑ BP)
↓ ↑ ↑ ↓ ↓ Renin activity XX: virilization
aAll congenital adrenal enzyme deficiencies are characterized by an enlargement of both adrenal glands caused by ↑ ACTH stimulation (caused by 
↓ cortisol).
Reproduced with permission from Le T, Bhushan V. First Aid for the USMLE Step 1 2018. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2018.
TABLE 2.3-12.  O verview of Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia
116 ENDOCRINOLOGYHIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.03_Step2CK_Endo_10e_089-118.indd   116 8/28/18   12:37 PM

=== PAGE 134 ===
Multiple Endocrine Neoplasias
A family of tumor syndromes with autosomal dominant inheritance (see 
Figure 2.3-22).
■ MEN type 1 (Wermer syndrome):
■ Pancreatic islet cell tumors.
■ Gastrinomas: Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.
■ Insulinomas: Recurrent hypoglycemia with elevated insulin and 
C-peptide levels.
■ VIPomas: Watery diarrhea, hypokalemia, hypochlorhydria.
■ Glucagonoma: New-onset diabetes, necrolytic migratory erythema.
■ Parathyroid hyperplasia.
■ Pituitary adenomas.
■ MEN type 2A (Sipple syndrome):  Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid, 
pheochromocytoma or adrenal hyperplasia, parathyroid gland hyperplasia. 
Caused by mutations in the RET proto-oncogene.
■ MEN type 2B:  Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid, pheochromocytoma, 
oral and intestinal ganglioneuromatosis (mucosal neuromas), marfanoid 
habitus. Caused by mutations in the RET proto-oncogene.
 MNEMONIC
MEN 1 affects “P” organs—
Pancreas
Pituitary
Parathyroid
CONGENITAL ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA
Inherited enzyme defects that impair cortisol synthesis and result in the 
accumulation of cortisol precursors. Most cases are caused by 21-hydroxylase 
deficiency (95%, autosomal recessive), but other causes include 11- and 
17-hydroxylase deficiencies.
H
istory/PE
See Table 2.3-12.
D
iagnosis
■ Lab tests: Electrolyte abnormalities (see Table 2.3-12). In severe cases, 
mineralocorticoid deficiency may lead to life-threatening salt wasting.
■ Elevated serum 17-hydroxyprogesterone level is diagnostic of 21-hydroxylase 
deficiency.
t
rEatmEnt
■ Immediate fluid resuscitation and salt repletion. Administer cortisol to ↓ 
ACTH and adrenal androgens. Fludrocortisone is appropriate for severe 
21-hydroxylase deficiency.
■ Possible surgical correction of ambiguous genitalia.
■ Refer to the Gynecology chapter for information on the diagnosis and 
treatment of late-onset CAH.
 KEY FACT
Congenital aromatase deficiency will 
present similarly to CAH in female 
newborns with external virilization and 
ambiguous external genitalia. However, 
the patient will have no electrolyte or 
blood pressure abnormalities.
FIGURE 2.3-22.  Multiple endocrine neoplasias (MEN). (Reproduced with permission from UMSLE-
Rx.com.)
Pituitary
Pancreas
Parathyroids
Thyroid
(medullary carcinoma)
Pheochromocytomas
Mucosal neuromas
MEN 1 = 3 P’s: Pituitary, Parathyroids, 
   and Pancreas
MEN 2A = 2 P’s: Parathyroids 
   and Pheochromocytomas 
MEN 2 B = 1 P: Pheochromocytomas
117ENDOCRINOLOGY HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.03_Step2CK_Endo_10e_089-118.indd   117 8/28/18   12:37 PM

=== PAGE 135 ===
NOTES
118 ENDOCRINOLOGYHIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.03_Step2CK_Endo_10e_089-118.indd   118 8/28/18   12:37 PM

=== PAGE 136 ===
Assessment of Disease Frequency 120
Assessment of Diagnostic Studies
 120
SenSitivity and Specificity 120
poSitive and negative predictive valueS 121
likelihood ratio 122
Measures of Effect 122
Survival Curves
 123
Types of Clinical Studies
 123
croSS-Sectional Study 124
cohort Study 124
caSe-control Study 124
randomized controlled trial 125
Evaluating Clinical Studies 126
BiaS 126
StatiStical teSting 127
prevention 128
vaccination 128
Behavioral Counseling 130
Screening Recommendations
 132
Causes of Death
 133
Reportable Diseases
 134
119
HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
EPIDEMIOLOGY
2019_02.04_Step2CK_Epidem_10e_119-134.indd   119 8/28/18   12:39 PM

=== PAGE 137 ===
Assessment of Disease Frequency
The prevalence of a disease is the number of existing cases in the population 
at a specific moment in time.
Prevalence total numbero fc ases in thep opulat= i iona to ne pointi n time
totalp opulation
The incidence of a disease is the number of new cases in the disease-free pop-
ulation (“population at risk”) that develop over a period of time.
Incidence numbero fn ew casesi nt he population= over ag iven timep eriod
totalp opulationa tr i iskd uringt he specified timep eriod
Prevalence depends on incidence and duration.
Prevalence (P) = incidence (I) × average duration of disease (D)
For incidence, remember to subtract any preexisting cases of the disease from 
the total population at risk, as these individuals are no longer at risk.
Assessment of Diagnostic Studies
SENSITIVITY AND SPECIFICITY
Physicians often use tests to narrow and confirm possible diagnoses. The sen-
sitivity and specificity of these tests allow physicians to determine how often 
false⊕ and false⊝ results occur (see Figure 2.4-1). Both sensitivity and speci-
ficity are independent of disease prevalence.
■ Sensitivity:  The probability that a patient with a disease will have a ⊕ test 
result.
■ A sensitive test will rarely miss people with the disease and is therefore 
good at ruling out those who do not have the disease. A high sensitivity 
means there is a low false⊝ rate.
■ Desirable early in a diagnostic workup or screening test, when it is nec -
essary to reduce a broad differential diagnosis.
■ Example: An initial ELISA test for HIV infection.
False⊝ ratio 
= 1 − sensitivity
■ Specificity:  The probability that a patient without a disease will have a ⊝ 
test result.
■ A specific test will rarely determine that someone has the disease when 
in fact they do not and is therefore good at ruling in those who have 
the disease. A high specificity means there is a low false⊕ rate.
 KEY FACT
Incidence can be measured in a cohort 
study; prevalence can be measured in a 
cross-sectional study.
 KEY FACT
As the mortality of a disease ↓, the 
prevalence of that disease ↑ (eg, HIV 
infection), because the duration of 
disease has lengthened. Remember:  
P = I × D.
 KEY FACT
Accuracy (and validity) measures 
bias. Accuracy requires correct 
measurements. Precision (and reliability) 
measures random error. Precision ↑ 
with ↑ sample size.
 MNEMONIC
SNOUT—SeNsitive tests rule OUT disease.
SPIN—SPecific tests rule IN disease.
Disease
present
No
disease
Positive test aP PV = a  / (a + b) 
Negative test cN PV = d / (c + d) 
LR+ = Sensitivity / (a − Speci/f_icity)
LR− = (1 Sensitivity) / Speci/f_icity
Sensitivity = a / (a + c)  Speci/f_icity = d / (b + d)
Prevalence = (a + b) / (a + b + c + d)
b
d
FIGURE 2.4-1.  Sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV), and negative pre-
dictive value (NPV). Presence or absence of disease is typically assessed using a “gold standard” 
test, or the most accurate test available for a given disease.
120 EPIDEMIOLOGYHIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.04_Step2CK_Epidem_10e_119-134.indd   120 8/28/18   12:39 PM

=== PAGE 138 ===
■ Desirable when confirming a likely diagnosis. ↑ Specificity ↓ the num-
ber of false⊕ results.
■ Example: A Western blot confirmatory HIV test.
False⊕ ratio 
= 1 − specificity
The ideal test is both sensitive and specific, but a trade-off must often be 
made between sensitivity and specificity (see Figure 2.4-2). For a given test, 
when sensitivity ↑, specificity ↓ (and vice versa).
Occasionally, you will be asked to compare different diagnostic tests using 
their receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves, where sensitivity is plot-
ted on the y-axis and 1 – specificity is plotted on the x-axis (see Figure 2.4-3). 
The best diagnostic test will have a curve that “hugs” the x- and y-axes 
(curve X).
POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE PREDICTIVE VALUES
Once a test has been administered and a patient’s result has been made avail-
able, that result must be interpreted through use of predictive values. Remem-
ber, unlike sensitivity and specificity, positive predictive value (PPV) and 
negative predictive value (NPV) depend both on the test characteristics and 
the underlying disease prevalence.
■ PPV:  The probability that a patient with a ⊕ test result truly has the dis-
ease. The higher the disease prevalence, the higher the PPV of the test for 
that disease. A change in test cutoff point which ↑ both TP and FP will ↓ 
the PPV.
FIGURE 2.4-2.  Effect of cutoff values on sensitivity and specificity. (Modified with permission from USMLE-RX.com.)
No disease
Test results
Disease
Number of people
AB C
POSSIBLE CUTOFF VALUES
A = 100% sensitivity cutoff value
B = practical compromise between speci/f_icity and sensitivity
C = 100% speci/f_icity cutoff value
Your hospital is considering 
adopting a new diagnostic test for 
pheochromocytoma. In Figure 2.4-2, 
the current diagnostic test (urinary 
metanephrines) falls close to point B. 
The new test falls closer to point A. 
How will the false positive and 
false negative rates of this new test 
compare to urinary metanephrines?
X
Y
    1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
    0
0           0.2            0.4            0.6            0.8            1
1-sensitivity 
Speciﬁcity 
FIGURE 2.4-3.  Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves. Curve X represents a bet-
ter diagnostic test than curve Y. (Reproduced with permission of USMLE-Rx.com.)
121EPIDEMIOLOGY HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.04_Step2CK_Epidem_10e_119-134.indd   121 8/28/18   12:39 PM

=== PAGE 139 ===
■ NPV:  The probability that a patient with a ⊝ test result truly does not 
have the disease. The lower the disease prevalence, the higher the NPV of 
the test for that disease.
LIKELIHOOD RATIO
The likelihood ratio (LR) expresses the extent to which a given test result is 
likely in diseased people as opposed to people without disease:
■ ⊕ LR shows how much the odds (or probability) of disease are ↑ if the test 
result is ⊕.
■ ⊝ LR shows how much the odds (or probability) of disease are ↓ if the test 
result is ⊝.
LR+ = sensitivity/(1 − specificity)
LR− = (1 − sensitivity)/specificity
Posttest odds = pretest odds × LR
Measures of Effect
A central aim of epidemiology is to assess the relationship between an expo-
sure event and an outcome measure. The likelihood or risk of observing an 
outcome following an exposure is quantified using measures of effect. There 
are several ways to express and compare risk. These include the following:
■ Absolute risk:  The incidence of disease.
■ Attributable risk (or risk difference):  The difference in risk between the 
exposed and unexposed groups.
Attributable risk = incidence of disease in exposed − incidence in unexposed 
= (RR − 1)/RR
■ Number needed to treat (NNT):  Number of individuals that need to be 
treated for one patient to benefit.
NNT = 1/absolute risk reduction
■ Relative risk (or risk ratio; RR):  Expresses how much more likely an 
exposed person is to get the disease in comparison to an unexposed per-
son. This indicates the relative strength of the association between expo-
sure and disease, making it useful when one is considering disease 
etiology.
RR incidencei ne xposed
incidencei n unexposed=
RR > 1 suggests ↑ risk
RR < 1 suggests ↓ risk
■ Odds ratio (OR):  An estimate of relative risk that is used in case-control 
studies. The OR tells how much more likely it is that a person with a dis-
ease has been exposed to a risk factor than someone without the disease. 
The lower the disease prevalence, the more closely it approximates RR. In 
case-control studies, the OR also describes how many times more likely an 
exposed individual is to have disease compared to an unexposed individ-
ual (see Figure 2.4-4).
■ Hazard ratio (HR):  An estimate of the chances that an event occurs in the 
treatment arm of a trial vs the nontreatment arm. Calculated similarly to 
The false positive rate will ↑ (capturing 
more of the “no disease” cohort), 
but the false negative rate will ↓ 
(capturing the little tail of the “disease” 
cohort).
122 EPIDEMIOLOGYHIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.04_Step2CK_Epidem_10e_119-134.indd   122 8/28/18   12:39 PM

=== PAGE 140 ===
OR. Values < 1 indicate that the treatment arm had a ↓ event rate and 
values > 1 indicate the event rate ↑.
OR odds that ad iseasedp ersoni se xposed
odds t= hhata nondiseasedp ersoni se xposed
Survival Curves
Once a diagnosis has been established, it is important to be able to describe 
the associated prognosis. Survival analysis is used to summarize the average 
time from one event (eg, presentation, diagnosis, or start of treatment) to any 
outcome that can occur only once during follow-up (eg, death or recurrence 
of cancer). The usual method is with a Kaplan-Meier curve (see Figure 2.4-5) 
describing the survival in a cohort of patients, with the probability of survival 
↓ over time as patients die or drop out from the study.
Types of Clinical Studies
Studies are typically used to evaluate diagnosis, treatment, and screening for a 
disease. Although the gold standard for such evaluation is a randomized, 
double-blind controlled trial, other types of studies may be used as well (eg, 
an observational study, in which the exposure in question is a therapeutic 
intervention). In descending order of strength of evidence, published studies 
regarding treatment options include randomized controlled trials (RCTs), 
 KEY FACT
Randomization minimizes bias and 
confounding; double-blind studies 
prevent observation bias.
RR  = a / (a + b) 
c / (c + d) 
OR = ad / bc
Disease
develops
No
disease
Exposure a
No exposure c
b
d
Absolute risk = (a + c) / (a + b + c + d)
Attributable risk = a / (a + b) − c / (c + d)
Number needed to treat = 1/AR
FIGURE 2.4-4.  Relative risk (RR) vs odds ratio (OR).
100
50
0
51 01 5
Years
Survival (%)
Chemotherapy 
plus radiation
Radiation alone
FIGURE 2.4-5.  Example of a Kaplan-Meier curve. Tick marks indicate right-censoring, or 
patients who did not fulfill the outcome measure during follow-up. In this example, the blue 
curve represents a more favorable prognosis compared to the red curve.
123EPIDEMIOLOGY HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.04_Step2CK_Epidem_10e_119-134.indd   123 8/28/18   12:39 PM

=== PAGE 141 ===
observational studies, and case series/case reports. Meta-analyses are often 
used to systematically synthesize information across studies to help summa-
rize the totality of the evidence. Randomization is successful when the base-
line characteristics of patients in each group are statistically similar.
CROSS-SECTIONAL STUDY
A cross-sectional study is an observational study that assesses risk factors and 
outcomes at a snapshot in time. This study does not prove temporal relation-
ships because it measures correlation, not causation.
Advantages of cross-sectional studies are as follows:
■ Provide an efficient means of examining a population, allowing simultane -
ous assessment of people with the disorder and those without it.
■ Can be used as a basis for diagnostic testing.
Disadvantages include the following:
■ Causal relationships cannot be determined because information is obtained  
only at a single point in time.
■ Risk or incidence of disease cannot be directly measured.
COHORT STUDY
In a cohort study,  a group of people sharing certain characteristics (eg, age, 
gender, occupation, or date of birth) is assembled to study the relationships 
between exposures and outcomes of interest. For each possible risk factor, 
the members of the cohort are classified as either exposed or unexposed. All 
the cohort members are then followed over time, and the incidence of out-
come events is compared in the two exposure groups. Example: The Fram-
ingham Heart Study followed a group of men and women over time to see 
how different exposures (eg, diet, exercise, aspirin) affected the incidence of 
heart disease.
Advantages of cohort studies are as follows:
■  Only way to directly determine incidence (because they follow a cohort 
over time to assess disease development).
■ Can be used to assess the relationship of a given exposure to many diseases.
■ In prospective studies, exposure is elicited without bias from a known 
outcome.
Disadvantages include the following:
■ Can be time-consuming and expensive.
■ Studies assess only the relationship of the disease to the few exposure fac-
tors recorded at the start of the study.
■ Requirements for many subjects makes it difficult to study rare diseases .
Cohort studies can be either prospective, in which a cohort is assembled in 
the present and followed into the future, or retrospective, in which a cohort is 
identified from past records and is followed to the present.
CASE-CONTROL STUDY
In a case-control study, a series of cases are identified and a set of controls are 
sampled from the underlying population to estimate the frequency of expo-
sure in the population at risk for the outcome. In such a study, a researcher 
compares the frequency of exposure to a possible risk factor between the case 
 KEY FACT
A cross-sectional study that is 
undertaken to estimate prevalence is 
called a prevalence study.
 KEY FACT
Cohort studies are also known as 
longitudinal studies or incidence 
studies, from which both OR and RR 
can be calculated.
 KEY FACT
In cohort studies, the researcher 
determines whether the participants 
are exposed or unexposed and 
follows them over time for disease 
development.
124 EPIDEMIOLOGYHIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.04_Step2CK_Epidem_10e_119-134.indd   124 8/28/18   12:39 PM

=== PAGE 142 ===
and control groups. Example: A study examines patients with heart disease 
(cases) and without heart disease (controls) and compares exposures to red 
meat between both groups.
■ Validity depends on appropriate selection of cases and controls, the way 
exposure is measured, and the way with which confounding variables are 
dealt.
■ External validity (also known as generalizability) is the applicability of the 
results to a new population
.
■ Cases and controls should be comparable in terms of opportunity for expo-
sure (ie, they should be members of the same base population with an 
equal opportunity of risk factor exposure).
■ “Matching” occurs when the researcher chooses controls that match cases 
on a particular characteristic.
■ Example: If matching on gender, female cases would be matched to 
female controls and male cases would be matched to male controls.
■ The purpose of matching is to ↓ confounding.
Advantages of case-control studies are as follows:
■ Use smaller groups than cohorts, thereby reducing cost.
■ Can be used to study rare diseases and can easily examine multiple risk 
factors. This is because in case-control studies the odds ratio is a close 
approximation of relative risk, known as “rare disease assumption.”
Disadvantages include the following:
■  Studies cannot calculate disease prevalence, or incidence, or directly 
estimate the relative risk because the numbers of subjects with and with-
out a disease are determined artificially by the investigator, not by 
nature. However, an OR can be used to estimate a measure of RR, if the 
prevalence is low.
■ Retrospective data can be inaccurate because of recall or survivorship biases.
RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIAL
An experimental, prospective study in which subjects are randomly assigned 
to a treatment or control group. Random assignment helps remove confound-
ing and ensure that the two groups are truly comparable. The control group 
may be treated with a placebo or with the accepted standard of care.
The study can be masked in one of two ways: single blind, in which 
patients do not know which treatment group they are in, or double blind, in 
which neither the patients nor their physicians know who is in which group.
■ Double-blind studies are the gold standard for studying treatment effects.
■ Factorial design involves several rounds of randomization with two or 
more variables.
■ Example: A trial studies the role of aspirin in preventing MI by giving one 
randomized group a baby aspirin daily and the control group a placebo. 
The rates of MI are then measured.
Advantages of RCTs are as follows (see also Table 2.4-1):
■ Minimize bias.
■ Have the potential to demonstrate causal relationships, because exposure 
is assigned randomly, which minimizes confounding.
Disadvantages include the following:
■ Costly and time-intensive.
■ Some interventions (eg, surgery) are not amenable to masking.
 KEY FACT
In case-control studies, the researcher 
controls the number of cases and 
controls. Only ORs can be calculated 
from case-control studies.
A local child care center that was built 
before the 1950s was found to have 
elevated lead levels in its paint. A 
student organization at your medical 
school is hosting a lead-screening 
event to test all children at the center. 
Which initial screening test would 
be more appropriate: a test that has 
high sensitivity or one that has high 
specificity?
1
What happens to the PPV and NPV 
when prevalence ↓?
2
125EPIDEMIOLOGY HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.04_Step2CK_Epidem_10e_119-134.indd   125 8/28/18   12:39 PM

=== PAGE 143 ===
Evaluating Clinical Studies
BIAS
Any process that causes results to systematically differ from the truth. Com-
mon types of bias include the following:
■ Selection bias: Occurs when samples or participants are selected that dif-
fer from other groups in additional determinants of outcome.
■ Example: Individuals concerned about a family history of breast cancer 
may 
be more likely to self-select in entering a mammography program, 
giving the impression of a prevalence that is higher than it is in reality.
■ Example: If a substantial portion of subjects in one group are lost to 
follow-up (attrition bias), the study may overestimate the association. 
This is a special type of selection bias.
Variable rC T CohorT Cross-seCTional Case ConTrol
Purpose Tests causality through random 
assignment of exposure
Follows groups of patients 
over a specified period 
to capture the associa-
tion of risk factors to the 
development of disease
Determines prevalence 
in a snapshot of time
Tests association (usually 
retrospectively, but 
outcome first, then looks 
for risk factors)
Measures Varied, including response to 
treatment, adverse effects, sur-
vival during follow-up
RR, OR, incidence, 
prevalence
Prevalence (not 
incidence)
OR
Design Subjects are randomly assigned 
to be in treatment or placebo 
arms
Subjects are not assigned 
to groups
Determines if subjects are 
in exposed or unexposed 
groups and follows them 
until they develop the 
disease (or do not)
Determines disease 
prevalence at one 
point in time; cannot 
determine the direc-
tionality of association 
between exposure 
and outcome
Identifies cases (disease) 
and controls (no disease) 
groups first and then 
goes backward to deter-
mine if they are exposed 
or not (the opposite of 
RCT and cohort studies)
Advantages Can determine causality; mini-
mizes bias and confounding
Temporality can be deter-
mined; incidence can be 
determined
Less time-consuming 
and costly
Predetermined number 
of cases; less time-
consuming and costly
Disadvantages RCT is not possible when:
■ T reatment has a known adverse 
outcome
■ Disease is v ery rare
■ T reatment is in widespread use 
or represents the best option 
(because it is unethical to 
withhold treatment)
Follows large groups over 
long periods
Selection bias in retrospec-
tive cohort studies
Directionality of asso-
ciation cannot be 
determined
Incidence cannot be 
determined
Recall bias, selection bias
TABLE 2.4-1.  C omparison of Study Designs
126 EPIDEMIOLOGYHIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
A test with high sensitivity, such as a 
fingerstick lead test (capillary blood), is 
preferred for initial screening because 
it can ensure that no children who 
might have the disease—and who 
might benefit from further testing 
and treatment—will be missed. The 
children with a ⊕ fingerstick test 
should subsequently have a serum 
blood level drawn (higher specificity).
1
PPV ↓ and NPV ↑. Remember that if 
prevalence is low, even a test with 
high sensitivity or specificity will have 
a low PPV.
2
2019_02.04_Step2CK_Epidem_10e_119-134.indd   126 8/28/18   12:39 PM

=== PAGE 144 ===
■ Measurement bias: Occurs when measurement or data-gathering meth-
ods differ between groups.
■ Example: One group is assessed by CT, while another group is assessed 
by MRI
.
■ Confounding bias:  Occurs when a third variable is either positively or 
negatively associated with both the exposure and outcome variables, 
inducing an incorrect association.
■ Example: Fishermen in an area may experience a higher incidence of 
lung cancer than that found in the general population. However, if 
smokers are more likely to become fishermen and are also more likely 
to develop lung cancer than nonsmokers, becoming a fisherman will 
not in itself lead to lung cancer. Rather, it is the smoking to which 
those fishermen are exposed that causes the association.
■ Effect modification, on the other hand, occurs when a third variable 
disproportionately affects two groups. Effect modification shows a 
meaningful difference, whereas confounding does not.
■ Example: A new chemotherapeutic agent is shown to improve survival 
in 
non-Hodgkin lymphoma, but only in patients who are undergoing 
radiation therapy, whereas those not receiving radiation show no 
benefit.
■ Recall bias:  Results from a difference between two groups in the retro-
spective recall of past factors or outcomes.
■ Example: A patient with cancer may be more motivated to recall past 
episodes of chemical exposure than would a healthy individual.
■ Observer bias:  Results from investigator’s awareness of the population 
being studied and its exposure status.
■ Example: A trial for new blood pressure management in the ICU is 
biased 
when the attending physician knows which patients are enrolled 
in the treatment arm.
■ Hawthorne effect:  Results from study subjects’ awareness that they are 
being studied, causing them to change aspects of their behavior.
■ Example: Employees at an automotive factory may work more produc -
tively when they realize that their superiors are conducting random 
audits.
■ Lead-time bias:  Results from earlier detection of disease, giving an appear-
ance of prolonged survival when in fact the natural course is not altered.
■ Example: A new and widely used screening test that detects cancer 
5 
years earlier may yield the impression that patients are living longer 
with the disease.
■ Length bias:  Occurs when screening tests detect a disproportionate num-
ber of slowly progressive diseases but miss rapidly progressive ones, leading 
to overestimation of the benefit of the screen.
■ Example: A better prognosis for patients with cancer is celebrated fol -
lowing the implementation of a new screening program. However, this 
test disproportionately detects slow-growing tumors, which generally 
tend to be less aggressive.
STATISTICAL TESTING
Even with bias reduction, unsystematic random error is unavoidable because 
of chance variation in studied data. Types of errors are as follows:
■ Type I ( 𝛂) error:
■ The probability of concluding that there is a difference in treatment 
effects between groups when in fact there is not (ie, a false ⊕ 
conclusion)—in other words, rejecting the null hypothesis (of no 
effect) when it should not be rejected.
 KEY FACT
Studies that are masked and 
randomized are better protected 
from the effects of bias, whereas 
observational studies are particularly 
susceptible to bias.
 KEY FACT
Confounding variables reduce the 
internal validity of a study.
Assume that the data below are from 
a hypothetical case-control study. 
Calculate and interpret the OR.
Exposed
Not 
exposed
Cases 283 263
Controls 182 210
127EPIDEMIOLOGY HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.04_Step2CK_Epidem_10e_119-134.indd   127 8/28/18   12:39 PM

=== PAGE 145 ===
■ The P  value is an estimate of the probability that differences in treat-
ment effects in a study could have happened by chance alone if no 
true association exists. Often, differences associated with a P<0.05 are 
statistically significant. A P value alone does not give any information 
about the direction or size of the effect.
■ Type II ( 𝛃) error:
■ The probability of concluding that there is no difference in treatment 
effects when in fact a difference exists (ie, a false ⊝ conclusion)—in 
other words, not rejecting the null hypothesis (of no effect) when it 
should be rejected.
■ Power is the probability that a study will find a statistically significant 
difference when one is truly there. Increasing the number of subjects 
in a study 
↑ the power.
Power = 1 − type II error (β)
The confidence interval (CI) is a way of expressing statistical significance 
(P value) that shows the size of the effect and the statistical power (the nar-
rower the CI, the greater the statistical power). CIs are interpreted as follows:
■ If one is using a 95% CI, there is a 95% chance that the interval contains 
the true value.
■ Larger sample sizes produce more power and narrower CIs. If the CI 
includes the null value (RR of 1.0% or 0%), the results are not statistically 
significant.
■ Example: An RCT studying aspirin to prevent myocardial infarction shows 
a relative risk of 0.9 with a 95% CI of 0.85 to 0.95 in a sample of 3000 
patients, whereas in a sample of 30 patients the 95% CI is 0.1 to 1.7. The 
first example shows a significant difference, whereas the second does not.
PREVENTION
There are three levels of prevention:
■ 1° Prevention:  Includes preventive measures to ↓ the incidence of disease 
in unaffected individuals.
■ 2° Prevention:  Focuses on identifying the disease early, when it is asymp-
tomatic or mild, and implementing measures that can halt or slow disease 
progression. Includes screening tests that are designed to identify subclini-
cal disease.
■ 3° Prevention:  Includes measures that ↓ morbidity or mortality resulting 
from the presence of disease.
Prevention may be accomplished by a combination of immunization, chemo-
prevention, behavioral counseling, and screening. A good screening test has 
the following characteristics:
■ High sensitivity and specificity (usually more important to have high sensi -
tivity to rule out those who do not have the disease).
■ High PPV.
■ Inexpensive, easy to administer, and safe.
■ Treatment after screening is more effective than subsequent treatment 
without screening.
VACCINATION
Vaccines work by mimicking infections and triggering an immune response 
in which memory cells are formed to recognize and fight any future infection. 
There are several different vaccine formulations, as indicated in Table 2.4-2.
 KEY FACT
Examples of levels of prevention:
■ 1° P revention: A woman reduces 
dietary intake of fat or alcohol to 
reduce her risk for developing 
breast cancer.
■ 2° P revention: A woman obtains 
a mammogram to screen for breast 
cancer.
■ 3° P revention: A woman 
undergoes adjuvant therapy with 
tamoxifen for breast cancer.
OR  =  ad/bc  
= (283 × 210)/(263 × 182) = 1.24
Interpretation: The exposed group 
had 1.24 times the odds of having 
disease compared to the unexposed 
group.
128 EPIDEMIOLOGYHIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.04_Step2CK_Epidem_10e_119-134.indd   128 8/28/18   12:39 PM

=== PAGE 146 ===
Recommended vaccination schedules for children and adults are outlined 
in Figures 2.4-6 and 2.4-7.
Live vaccines should not be administered to immunosuppressed patients 
(see Figure 2.4-8). They are also contraindicated in pregnant women owing to 
a theoretical risk for maternal-fetal transmission. A possible exception to this 
rule can be some asymptomatic HIV/AIDS patients who may be candidates 
for the MMR vaccine.
FIGURE 2.4-6.  Recommended vaccinations for children 0–18 years of age. (Reproduced courtesy of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Atlanta, GA, https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/downloads/child/0-18yrs-child-combined-schedule.pdf. Data from 2017.)
Birth 1 mo 2 mos 4 mos 6 mos 9 mos 12 mos 15 mos 18 mos 19–23 mos 2–3 yrs4 –6 yrs7 –10 yrs 11–12 yrs 13–15 yrs 17–18 yrs16 yrs
Hepatitis B (HepB) 1st dose
Rotavirus (RV) RV1 (2-dose 
series); RV5 (3-dose series)
1st dose 2nd dose
Diphtheria, tetanus, & acellular 
pertussis (DTaP: < 7 yrs)
1st dose 2nd dose 3rd dose 5th dose
Tetanus, diphtheria, & acellular 
pertussis (Tdap: ≥ 7 yrs)
Tdap
type b (Hib)
Haemophilus in/f_luenzae
1st dose 2nd dose
Pneumococcal conjugate
(PCV13)
1st dose 2nd dose 3rd dose
Pneumococcal polysaccharide
(PPSV23)
Inactivated poliovirus
(IPV: < 18 yrs)
1st dose 2nd dose 4th dose
In/f_luenza (IIV)
Measles, mumps, rubella (MMR) 2nd dose
Varicella (VAR) 2nd dose
Hepatitis A (HepA)
Human papillomavirus (HPV)
Meningococcal (MenACWY-D
≥ 9 mos; MenACWY-CRM ≥ 2 mos) 1st dose 2nd dose
3rd dose2nd dose
4th dose
3rd or 4th dose
4th dose
Meningococcal B
3rd dose
Annual vaccination (IIV) 1 or 2 doses
Annual vaccination (IIV) 
1 dose only
1st dose
1st dose
2-dose series
Range of recommended 
ages for all children
Range of recommended ages 
for catch-up immunization
Range of recommended ages 
for certain high-risk groups
Not routinely recommended Range of recommended ages for
non-high-risk groups that may
receive vaccine, subject to
individual clinical decision making
Vaccine ▼ Age 
▼
VaCCine Type TargeTed diseases
Live attenuated Measles, mumps, rubella, polio (Sabin), yellow fever, influenza (nasal spray), 
varicella
Inactivated (killed) Cholera, HAV, polio (Salk), rabies, influenza (injection)
Toxoid Diphtheria, tetanus
Subunit HBV, pertussis, Streptococcus pneumoniae, HPV, meningococcus
Conjugate Hib, S pneumoniae
TABLE 2.4-2.  T ypes of Vaccinations
129EPIDEMIOLOGY HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.04_Step2CK_Epidem_10e_119-134.indd   129 8/28/18   12:39 PM

=== PAGE 147 ===
Behavioral Counseling
In offering counsel, physicians should tailor their education and sugges-
tions to the individual patient as well as to his or her stage of change (see 
Table 2.4-3 and Figure 2.4-9).
FIGURE 2.4-7.  Recommended vaccinations for adults. (Reproduced courtesy of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, https://www.cdc.
gov/vaccines/schedules/downloads/adult/adult-combined-schedule.pdf. Data from 2017.)
Vaccine  19–21 years 22–26 years 27–49 years 50–64 years ≥ 65 years
Tdap or Td
VAR
RZV (preferred)
or
ZVL
In/f_luenza
HPV-Female
HPV-Male
PCV13
PPSV23
HepA
HepB
MenACWY
MenB
1 dose annually
1 dose Tdap, then Td booster every 10 yrs
2 doses
2 doses RZV (preferred)
MMR 1 or 2 doses depending on indication (if born in 1957 or later)
2 or 3 doses depending on age at series initiation
2 or 3 doses depending on age at series initiation
2 or 3 doses depending on vaccine
3 doses
1 or 2 doses depending on indication, then booster every 5 yrs if risk remains
2 or 3 doses depending on vaccine
Hib 1 or 3 doses depending on indication
Recommended for adults who meet the age requirement, lack
documentation of vaccination, or lack evidence of past infection
Recommended for adults with other indications No recommendation
1 dose
1 or 2 doses depending on indicatio
n1  dose
1 dose ZVL
or
sTage of Change CharaCTerizaTion example
Precontemplation Denial or ignorance of the problem A heroin addict has not even thought about cessation
Contemplation Ambivalence or conflicted emotions; 
assessing benefits and barriers to change
The heroin addict considers treatment for his addiction
Preparation Experimenting with small changes; col-
lecting information about change
The heroin addict visits his doctor to ask questions about quitting
Action Taking direct action toward achieving a goal The heroin addict enters a rehabilitation facility for treatment of addiction
Maintenance Maintaining a new behavior; avoiding 
temptation
The heroin addict continues to visit recovery meetings to gain support 
and reinforcement against relapse
TABLE 2.4-3.  S tages of Change in Behavioral Counseling
130 EPIDEMIOLOGYHIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.04_Step2CK_Epidem_10e_119-134.indd   130 8/28/18   12:39 PM

=== PAGE 148 ===
FIGURE 2.4-8.  Recommended vaccines for special populations. (Reproduced courtesy of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, https://
www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/downloads/adult/adult-combined-schedule.pdf. Data from 2017.)
Va ccine ▼
 
Pregnancy
Immuno-
compromised
(excluding HIV
infection)
HIV infection
CD4+ count
(cells/µL)
/H11021 200/H11350 200
Asplenia,
persistent
complement
de/f_iciencies
Kidney failure,
end-stage renal
disease, on
hemodialysis
Heart or lung
disease, chronic
alcoholism
Chronic liver
disease Diabetes
Healthcare
personnel
Men who
have sex
with men
Td/Tdap
VAR
HZV
HPV-Female
In/f_luenza
HPV-Male
PCV13
PPSV23
HepA
HepB
MenACWY or MPSV4
MenB
Hib
1 dose annually
Substitute Tdap for Td once, then Td booster every 10 yrs
2 doses
1 dose
3 doses through age 26 yrs
Contraindicated
Contraindicated
Contraindicated
MMR 1 or 2 doses depending on indication
1 dose
3 doses
1 or more doses depending on indication
2 or 3 doses depending on vaccine
1 dose
3 doses
post-HSCT
recipients only
Recommended for adults who meet the age
requirement, lack documentation of vaccination,
or lack evidence of past infection
Recommended for adults with additional
medical conditions or other indications
No recommendation
1, 2, or 3 doses depending on indication
2 or 3 doses depending on vaccine
1 dose Tdap
each pregnancy
3 doses through age 21 yrs3 doses through age 26 yrs
3 doses
through age
26 yrs
Contraindicated
FIGURE 2.4-9.  Stages of change model. (Reproduced with permission from USMLE-Rx.com.)
Action
Active modiﬁcation
of behavior
Precontemplation
No intention of
changing behavior
Preparation
Made the decision to
change, intent on
taking action
Maintenance
Sustaining
change
Contemplation
Problem
acknowledgment,
no speciﬁc actions
Relapse
Fall back into old
patterns of behavior
131EPIDEMIOLOGY HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.04_Step2CK_Epidem_10e_119-134.indd   131 8/28/18   12:39 PM

=== PAGE 149 ===
Screening Recommendations
Tables 2.4-4 and 2.4-5 outline recommended health care screening measures 
by gender and age.
age in 
years 
reCommendaTion
CardioVasCular breasT/reproduCTiVe oTher
19–39 BP screening at least 
once every 2 years
Cholesterol screening 
starting at 20 years 
of age for patients 
at ↑ risk of heart 
disease
Pap test every 3 years starting at 21 years of age; co-
testing (Pap + HPV) may be done every 5 years 
starting at 30 years of age
Chlamydia test yearly until 24 years of age if sexually 
active. Women ≥ 25 years of age should be tested 
only if there is an ↑ risk
HIV test at least once to ascertain status
Test for gonorrhea and syphilis if at ↑ risk
Diabetes: Blood glucose or HbA
1c screening 
starting if BP > 135/80 mm Hg or taking medi-
cation for hypertension
40–49 BP screening at least 
once every 2 years
Cholesterol screening 
for patients at ↑ risk 
for heart disease
Pap test every 3 years or co-testing every 5 years
Pelvic exam yearly; chlamydia test if patient has new or 
multiple partners
HIV test at least once to ascertain status
Test for gonorrhea and syphilis if at ↑ risk
Diabetes: Blood glucose or HbA
1c screening 
starting if BP > 135/80 mm Hg or taking medi-
cation for hypertension
50–64 BP screening at least 
once every 2 years
Cholesterol screening 
for patients at ↑ risk 
for heart disease
Mammogram once every 1–2 years (can start at 40 
years of age, if patient chooses)
Pap test every 3 years
Chlamydia test if patient has new or multiple partners
HIV test at least once to ascertain status
Test for gonorrhea and syphilis if at ↑ risk
Diabetes: Blood glucose or HbA
1c screening 
starting if BP > 135/80 mm Hg or taking 
medication for hypertension
Bone: Discuss BMD test with physician or nurse
Colorectal: FOBT yearly; flexible sigmoidoscopy 
every 5 years or colonoscopy every 10 years
≥ 65 BP screening at least 
once every 2 years
Cholesterol screening 
for patients at ↑ risk 
for heart disease
Mammogram once every 1–2 years until 75 years of age
Discuss Pap test with physician or nurse
Chlamydia test if patient has new or multiple partners
Discuss HIV test with physician or nurse
Test for gonorrhea and syphilis if at ↑ risk
Diabetes: Blood glucose or HbA
1c screening 
starting if blood pressure higher than 135/80 
or taking medication for hypertension
Bone: BMD test at least once
Colorectal: Screening with fecal occult blood 
testing, sigmoidoscopy, or colonoscopy 
every 10 years until 75 years of age
Modified with permission from the US Department of Health and Human Services, Washington, DC.
TABLE 2.4-4.  H ealth Screening Recommendations for Women by Age
132 EPIDEMIOLOGYHIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.04_Step2CK_Epidem_10e_119-134.indd   132 8/28/18   12:39 PM

=== PAGE 150 ===
Causes of Death
The leading cause of cancer mortality in the United States is lung cancer. 
Prostate and breast cancers are the most prevalent cancers in men and 
women, respectively, with lung and colorectal cancers ranking second and 
third most common in both sexes. Table 2.4-6 lists the principal causes of 
death in the United States by age group.
TABLE 2.4-5.  H ealth Screening Recommendations for Men by Age
age in 
years
reCommendaTion
CardioVasCular reproduCTiVe oTher
19–39 BP screening at least once every 
2 years
Cholesterol screening starting at 
20 years of age for patients at 
↑ risk for heart disease. Screen 
all men > 35 years of age
Both partners should be tested for 
STDs, including HIV, before initiating 
sexual intercourse
Test for syphilis if at ↑ risk
N/A
40–49 BP screening at least once every 
2 years
Cholesterol screening for all 
men > 35 years of age
Discuss DRE and PSA with physician or 
nurse
HIV test at least once to ascertain status
Test for syphilis if at ↑ risk
Diabetes: Blood glucose or HbA
1c screening starting 
if BP > 135/80 mm Hg or taking medication for 
hypertension
50–64 BP screening at least once every 
2 years
Cholesterol screening for all 
men > 35 years of age
Discuss DRE and PSA with physician or 
nurse
HIV test at least once to ascertain status
Test for syphilis if at ↑ risk
Diabetes: Blood glucose or HbA
1c screening starting 
if BP > 135/80 mm Hg or taking medication for 
hypertension
Colorectal: Screening with fecal occult blood testing 
yearly; flexible sigmoidoscopy every 5 years or 
colonoscopy every 10 years
≥ 65 BP screening at least once every 
2 years
Cholesterol screening for all 
men > 35 years of age 
Discuss DRE and PSA with physician or 
nurse
Discuss HIV test with physician
Test for syphilis if at ↑ risk
Diabetes: Blood glucose or HbA
1c screening starting 
if BP > 135/80 mm Hg or taking medication for 
hypertension
Colorectal: Screening with fecal occult blood 
testing; flexible sigmoidoscopy every 5 years or 
colonoscopy every 10 years (patients > 75 years 
of age should discuss with physician)
Abdominal aortic aneurysm: One-time screening for 
men who have ever smoked
Modified with permission from the US Department of Health and Human Services, Washington, DC.
A hypothetical study finds a ⊕ 
association between poor sleep 
habits and the risk for Parkinson 
disease. The RR is 10, and the P value 
is 0.4. How do you interpret these 
results?
133EPIDEMIOLOGY HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.04_Step2CK_Epidem_10e_119-134.indd   133 8/28/18   12:39 PM

=== PAGE 151 ===
Reportable Diseases
By law, disease reporting is mandated at the state level, and the list of dis-
eases that must be reported to public health authorities varies slightly by 
state. The CDC has a list of nationally notifiable diseases that states volun-
tarily report to the CDC. These diseases include but are not limited to those 
listed in Table 2.4-7.
rank men Women
1 Heart disease (24%) Heart disease (22%)
2 Cancer (23%) Cancer (21%)
3 Unintentional injuries (7%) Chronic lower respiratory diseases (6%)
4 Chronic lower respiratory diseases (7%) Cerebrovascular diseases (6%)
5 Cerebrovascular diseases (4%) Alzheimer disease (6%)
6 Diabetes (3%) Unintentional injuries (4%)
7 Suicide (2%) Diabetes (3%)
8 Alzheimer disease (2%) Influenza and pneumonia (2%)
9 Influenza and pneumonia (2%) Kidney disease (2%)
10 Chronic liver disease and cirrhosis (2%) Septicemia (2%)
Modified with permission from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, 
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/hus16.pdf. Data from 2015.
TABLE 2.4-6.  L eading Causes of Death by Gender
disease CaTegory examples
STDs HIV, AIDS, syphilis, gonorrhea, chlamydia, chancroid, HCV
Tick-borne disease Lyme disease, ehrlichiosis, Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Potential bioweapons Anthrax, smallpox, plague
Vaccine-preventable 
disease
Diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, measles, mumps, rubella, polio, vari-
cella, HAV, HBV, H influenzae (invasive), meningococcal disease
Water-/food-borne 
disease
Cholera, giardiasis, Legionella, listeriosis, botulism, shigellosis, shiga 
toxin–producing E coli, salmonellosis, trichinellosis, typhoid
Zoonoses Tularemia, psittacosis, brucellosis, rabies
Miscellaneous TB, leprosy, toxic shock syndrome, SARS, West Nile virus, VRSA, coccidi-
oidomycosis, cryptosporidiosis. MRSA is reportable in several states
TABLE 2.4-7.  C ommon Reportable Diseases
There is no sufficient evidence 
to reject the null hypothesis, and 
therefore there is insufficient evidence 
to support an association between 
poor sleep habits and the risk for 
Parkinson disease. Remember that the 
null hypothesis always assumes that 
there is no association between the 
exposure and outcome variables. If 
the P value is > 0.05, then you cannot 
reject the null hypothesis.
134 EPIDEMIOLOGYHIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.04_Step2CK_Epidem_10e_119-134.indd   134 8/28/18   12:39 PM

=== PAGE 152 ===
General Principles 136
Informed Consent
 136
Minors
 
136
Competence and Decision-Making Capacity
 137
End-of-Life Issues
 138
Written AdvAnce directives 138
WithdrAWAl of cAre 138
euthAnAsiA And PhysiciAn-Assisted suicide 138
futile treAtment 139
AlternAtive treAtment 139
Disclosure 139
full disclosure 139
medicAl errors 139
clinicAl reseArch 140
Confidentiality 140
Conflict of Interest
 140
Malpractice
 
141
135
HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
ETHICS AND LEGAL ISSUES
2019_02.05_Step2CK_Ethics_10e_135-142.indd   135 8/23/18   1:09 PM

=== PAGE 153 ===
General Principles
■ Respect for autonomy:  Clinicians are obligated to respect patients as indi-
viduals and to honor their preferences.
■ Example: A pregnant women has the right to refuse cesarean section 
despite potential risk to the fetus. This is called the principle of mater-
nal autonomy—so long as the mother has capacity, she has ultimate 
rights over her unborn child (in the United States).
■ Beneficence:  Physicians have a responsibility to act in the patient’s best 
interest. Respect for patient autonomy may conflict with beneficence. In 
general, if a patient is mentally competent, respect for patient autonomy 
supersedes beneficence even if the physician believes the patient is not 
acting in his or her best interest.
■ Example: The physician has a responsibility to recommend a life  saving 
transfusion to a Jehovah’s Witness (beneficence) and respect the 
patient’s autonomy if he or she should refuse.
■ Nonmaleficence:  “Do no harm.” All medical interventions involve bene-
fits and risks, and physicians should generally only recommend treatments 
where the likely benefits outweigh the known risks.
■ Example: A surgeon declines to perform a procedure, because she 
thinks the patient will die intraoperatively.
■ Justice:  Health care is a scarce resource. Fairness and equality in distribu-
tion and delivery of health care are ongoing challenges for health policy 
and in the clinical arena.
Informed Consent
■ Willing and voluntary acceptance of a medical intervention by a patient 
after adequate discussion with a physician about the nature of the inter
-
vention along with its indications, risks, benefits, and potential alternatives 
(including no treatment).
■ Patients may change their minds at any time.
■ Informed consent is required for significant procedures except for the 
following:
■ Emergency treatment is required.
■ Example: An unconscious patient presents with cerebral edema 
after a motor vehicle collision, or a patient without previously indi
-
cated DNR/DNI (do not resuscitate/do not intubate) status under-
goes cardiac arrest.
■ Patient lacks decision-making capacity. Consent is still required but 
must be obtained from a surrogate decision maker.
■ Example: Minors generally require surrogate decision makers  
until they demonstrate adequate decision-making capacity or are 
of legal age.
Minors
In general, minors (persons < 18 years of age) cannot consent for their own 
medical treatment and require parents or guardians to consent on their behalf 
(one parent is sufficient as long as that parent has custody), except in the fol-
lowing situations:
■ Life-threatening emergencies  when parents cannot be contacted.
■ Legal emancipation:  Emancipated minors do not require parental con-
sent for medical care. Although emancipation laws vary from state to state, 
 KEY FACT
In some cases (eg, psychiatric illness, 
grave disability), patients can be 
hospitalized against their will if they are 
deemed a threat to themselves or to 
others.
 KEY FACT
Patients with psychiatric illness can 
give consent if their decision-making 
capacity is intact.
 MNEMONIC
BRAIN of informed consent—
Benefits
Risks
Alternatives
Indications
Nature
 MNEMONIC
In the absence of a living will or 
durable power of attorney for 
health care—
The SPOUSE CHIPS in For the 
patient
SPOUSE
CHIldren
Parent
Sibling
Friend (in this order)
136 ETHICS AND LEGAL ISSUESHIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.05_Step2CK_Ethics_10e_135-142.indd   136 8/23/18   1:09 PM

=== PAGE 154 ===
in general minors are emancipated if they are married, are in the armed 
services, or are financially independent of their parents and have obtained 
legal emancipation.
■ Sexually transmitted infections and substance abuse treatment:  Rules 
concerning contraception, pregnancy, and abortion services and treatment 
for drug and alcohol dependency vary across the United States. In some 
states, the physician is left with the decision of informing parents about 
adolescent use of confidential services in the interest of best serving the 
patient; other states limit disclosure.
■ Refusal of treatment: A parent has the right to refuse treatment for his or 
her child as long as those decisions do not pose a serious threat to the 
child’s well-being (eg, refusing immunizations is not considered a serious 
threat). If a parental decision is not in the best interest of the child, a phy-
sician may provide treatment against parental wishes. In emergent situa-
tions, if withholding treatment jeopardizes the child’s safety, treatment can 
be initiated on the basis of legal precedent. In nonemergent situations, the 
provider should seek a court order.
■ Example: A physician provides blood transfusion to save the life of a 
6-year-old child seriously injured in a motor vehicle collision despite 
parental requests to withhold such a measure.
■ Prenatal care:  Some states allow, but do not require, parental disclosure 
when a minor seeks prenatal care.
Competence and Decision-Making Capacity
■ Competence:  A person’s global and legal capacity to make decisions and 
to be held accountable in a court of law. Competence is assessed by the 
courts and is distinct from the term decision-making capacity.
■ Incompetent patients, as assessed by the courts, or temporarily incapac-
itated patients may still be able to provide assent for treatment or refuse 
treatment. However, the need to treat supersedes the refusal of an inca-
pacitated patient in emergency situations.
■ Example: An extremely hypertensive patient with altered mental 
status who refuses treatment may receive antihypertensive therapy, 
as this constitutes a medical emergency.
■ Decision-making capacity:  The ability of a patient to understand relevant 
information, appreciate the severity of the medical situation and its conse-
quences, communicate a choice, and deliberate rationally about his or her 
values in relation to the decision being made. This can be assessed by the 
physician.
■ Decision-making capacity is best understood as varying with the com -
plexity of the decision involved.
■ Example: The level of capacity needed for a decision about liver 
transplantation is different from that needed to choose between two 
types of pain medication for fracture-related pain.
■ In general, patients who have decision-making capacity have the right 
to refuse or discontinue treatment.
■ Example: Jehovah’s Witnesses can refuse blood products. When a 
Jehovah’s Witness lacks decision-making capacity (eg, altered men
-
tal status or unconscious), the physician is allowed to provide a 
blood transfusion in an emergency situation.
■ A patient’s decision to refuse treatment can be overruled if the choice 
endangers the health and welfare of others.
■ Example: A patient with active TB must undergo antibiotic treat -
ment, because not treating would pose a public health threat.
 KEY FACT
Brain death is the irreversible loss of 
all brain activity and is equivalent to 
cardiopulmonary death. If a patient 
is brain dead, no consent is needed 
to stop therapy. Two physicians are 
required to perform a brain death exam 
to legally declare a patient brain dead.
A 47-year-old man is diagnosed with 
pancreatic cancer. His diagnosis and 
treatment options are discussed, but 
the patient refuses any intervention. 
He states that he would like to go 
home to his wife and children to 
die peacefully. What is the most 
appropriate next step in management?
1
A 5-year-old girl with hydrocephalus 
needs another revision of her 
ventriculoperitoneal shunt. There are 
no satisfactory alternatives available 
to relieve her symptoms. Her father 
consents, but her mother refuses, 
arguing that she has been through 
enough procedures in her young life. 
What is the most appropriate next 
step in management?
2
A 51-year-old man is brought to 
the emergency department after 
he was struck by a motor vehicle. 
He is unresponsive and in need 
of emergent surgery. His wife and 
children cannot be reached. What 
is the most appropriate next step in 
treatment?
3
137ETHICS AND LEGAL ISSUES HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.05_Step2CK_Ethics_10e_135-142.indd   137 8/23/18   1:09 PM

=== PAGE 155 ===
End-of-Life Issues
WRITTEN ADVANCE DIRECTIVES
■ Living will:  Addresses a patient’s wishes to maintain, withhold, or with-
draw life-sustaining treatment in the event of terminal disease or a persis-
tent vegetative state when the patient has lost the capacity to make 
decisions. DNR and DNI orders are based on patient preferences regard-
ing CPR and intubation only. Patients can refuse all nonpalliative treat-
ments or specific therapies (eg, CPR, intubation, antibiotics, feeding 
tubes). A living will overrides the wishes of the family.
■ Durable power of attorney for health care:  Legally designates a surrogate 
health care decision maker if a patient lacks decision-making capacity. 
More flexible than a living will. Surrogates should make decisions consis-
tent with the person’s stated wishes.
■ No living will:  If no living will or durable power of attorney for health 
care exists, decisions should be made by close family members (spouse, 
adult children, parents, and adult siblings) or friends, in that order.
■ Ethics committees or court orders can be helpful when the patient lacks 
capacity, has no proxy or advance directives, and there is disagreement 
among family members, or when there is disagreement between the fam-
ily and health care providers (eg, in cases of medical futility or parental 
refusal of necessary treatment for minors).
WITHDRAWAL OF CARE
■ Patients and their decision makers have the right to forego or withdraw 
life-sustaining treatment. Nevertheless, physicians should seek to under
-
stand patients and their reasons for refusing beneficial treatments.
■ No ethical distinction is made between withholding a treatment and with -
drawing a treatment, because a patient may choose to refuse an interven-
tion either before or after it is initiated. This can include ventilation, 
fluids, nutrition, and medications such as antibiotics.
■ Hospice care is focused on palliation of symptoms for patients with a prog -
nosis of < 6 months of life. The focus is on pain management, quality of 
life, and bereavement.
■ If the intent is to relieve suffering and medications administered are 
titrated for that purpose, it is considered ethical to provide palliative treat
-
ment to relieve pain and suffering even if it may hasten a patient’s death 
(principle of double effect).
■ Example: A physician may prescribe a high-dose opioid analgesic to a 
patient who is expected to die within 1 day, even though it may sup
-
press respiration and hasten death.
EUTHANASIA AND PHYSICIAN-ASSISTED SUICIDE
■ Euthanasia is the administration of a lethal agent with the intent to end 
life.
■ It is opposed by the AMA Code of Medical Ethics and is illegal in all 
states.
■ Patients who request euthanasia should be evaluated for inadequate 
pain control and comorbid depression.
■ Physician-assisted suicide consists of prescribing a lethal agent to a patient 
who will self-administer it to end his or her own life. This is currently 
 KEY FACT
Do not resuscitate (DNR) and Do not 
intubate (DNI) orders do not mean “do 
not treat.”
Proceed with the surgery. A physician 
may give emergent treatment in the 
absence of informed consent when 
immediate intervention is necessary 
to prevent serious harm or death.
3
Proceed with the shunt revision. The 
consent of one parent is sufficient 
to proceed with the treatment 
of a minor, particularly when it is 
unequivocally clear that the decision 
is in the child’s best interest.
2
Respectfully ask the patient about 
his reasons for not wanting to 
pursue treatment. Patients often 
need clarification and reassurance. 
If he continues to decline treatment, 
abide by his decision (respect for 
autonomy).
1
138 ETHICS AND LEGAL ISSUESHIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.05_Step2CK_Ethics_10e_135-142.indd   138 8/23/18   1:09 PM

=== PAGE 156 ===
illegal except in the states of Oregon, Washington, Vermont, Colorado, 
and California. This is also legal via court order in Montana. Though 
legal in the aforementioned states, according to the AMA Code of Medi-
cal Ethics, physician-assisted suicide is “fundamentally incompatible with 
the physician’s role as healer.”
FUTILE TREATMENT
Physicians are not ethically obligated to provide treatment and may refuse a 
patient’s or family member’s request for further intervention on the grounds 
of futility under any of the following circumstances:
■ There is no evidence or pathophysiologic rationale for the treatment.
■ The intervention has already failed.
■ Maximal intervention is currently failing.
■ Treatment will not achieve the goals of care .
ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT
If a patient is interested in alternative/nontraditional treatment, the physician 
should obtain more information as to why the patient is interested. While the 
physician should provide as much information as possible, he or she should 
not dismiss the patient.
Disclosure
FULL DISCLOSURE
■ Patients have a right to know about their medical status, prognosis, and 
treatment options (full disclosure). They have the legal right to obtain cop
-
ies of their medical records within a specified timeframe.
■ A patient’s family cannot require that a physician withhold information 
from the patient without the knowledge and consent of the patient. A phy
-
sician should explore why the family member does not want the diagnosis 
revealed, but ultimately the patient should be told.
■ A physician may withhold information only if the patient requests not to 
be 
told, or in the rare and controversial case in which a physician deter-
mines that disclosure would cause severe and immediate harm to the 
patient (therapeutic privilege).
MEDICAL ERRORS
■ Physicians are obligated to inform patients of mistakes made in their medi-
cal treatment.
■ It is not appropriate for a physician to blame another physician for a  
medical error without obtaining additional information from the original 
physician.
■ If the cause of a specific error or series of errors is not known, the physi -
cian should communicate this with the family promptly and maintain 
contact with the patient as investigations reveal more facts.
■ One of the largest contributors to medical error is failure to communi-
cate during sign-out and hand-off processes. The best way to avoid 
communication breakdown is to implement a checklist for hand-off.
 KEY FACT
Potential signs of elder abuse and 
neglect:
■ C uts, bruises, pressure ulcers, burns.
■ Uncommon frac tures.
■ M alnutrition or dehydration.
■ Anogenital injur y or infection.
■ E vidence of poor caretaking or 
financial exploitation.
 KEY FACT
Signs of suspected child abuse:
■ H istory given not consistent with 
injury.
■ Unusual child or par ental behavior.
■ D elay in seeking medical care.
■ Subdural hemat omas.
■ R etinal hemorrhages.
■ Spiral , bucket-handle, or rib 
fractures.
■ I njuries in different stages of 
healing.
A 35-year-old woman visits a primary 
care physician after hurting her wrist. 
Physical exam reveals circumferential 
bruises of her wrist, neck, and arms. 
The patient admits that the injuries 
were inflicted by her husband. What 
is the most appropriate next step in 
management?
139ETHICS AND LEGAL ISSUES HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.05_Step2CK_Ethics_10e_135-142.indd   139 8/23/18   1:09 PM

=== PAGE 157 ===
CLINICAL RESEARCH
■ Physicians are obligated to inform patients considering involvement in a 
clinical research protocol about the purpose of the research study and the 
entire study design as it will affect the patient’s treatment. This includes 
the possible risks, benefits, and alternatives to the research protocol.
■ An informed consent form approved by the overseeing research institu -
tional review board must be completed for participation in any clinical 
research protocol.
■ Newly deceased patients may be used for training health care providers.  
The physician must obtain permission from the family (or patient prior to 
death), and training must occur as part of a structured training program.
Confidentiality
■ Information disclosed by a patient to his or her physician and information 
about a patient’s medical condition are strictly confidential and should be 
discussed 
and accessed only by those directly involved in the patient’s 
care, with few exceptions (described later).
■ A patient may waive the obligation of the physician to protect confidential -
ity (eg, with insurance companies, authorized family members), preferably 
by way of written or verbal consent. The physician should disclose only 
the minimally necessary information.
■ It is ethically and legally necessary to override confidentiality in the follow-
ing situations:
■ Patient intent to commit a violent crime (Tarasoff decision): Physi-
cians have a duty to protect the intended victim through reasonable 
means (eg, warn the victim, notify police).
■ Suicidal patients .
■ Child abuse/neglect and elder abuse/neglect.
■ Reportable infectious diseases  (eg, HIV, sexually transmitted infec-
tions, tuberculosis). Duty to warn public officials and identifiable peo-
ple at risk. It is normally best to encourage patients themselves to inform 
sexual contacts who are at risk for contracting the illness.
■ Gunshot and knife wounds  (duty to notify the police).
■ The patient is a danger to others  (eg, impaired automobile drivers). 
Currently, only six states have mandatory physician reporting laws.
■ Example: A patient begins to drive 1 week after hospitalization for sei -
zures, although the department of motor vehicles in his state requires 
that licensed drivers be without seizures for at least 3 months.
Conflict of Interest
■ Occurs when physicians find themselves having a personal interest in a 
given situation that influences their professional obligations.
■ Example: A physician may own stock in a pharmaceutical company 
(financial interest) that produces a drug he is prescribing to his patient 
(patient care interest).
■ Physicians should disclose existing conflicts of interest to affected parties (eg,  
patients, institutions, audiences of journal articles or scientific meetings).
■ Accepting gifts from pharmaceutical companies can influence a physi -
cian’s practice and should generally be avoided. Nonmonetary gifts 
should be accepted only if they will directly benefit patient care and 
are of small monetary value. A physician should never accept cash.
 MNEMONIC
Overriding confidentiality—
WAIT a SEC before letting a 
dangerous patient go!
Wounds
Automobile-driving impairment
Infectious disease
Tarasoff (violent crimes) and Human 
Trafficking
Suicide
Elder abuse and neglect
Child abuse
 KEY FACT
Guiding principles for overriding 
confidentiality:
■ T here is an identifiable third party at 
risk for harm.
■ T he harm is significant and 
probable.
■ Disclosur e will help prevent or 
mitigate the harm.
■ O ther measures, such as convincing 
the patient to self-disclose, have 
failed.
 KEY FACT
Mandatory reporting of intimate-
partner violence is controversial and 
varies by state. Nonetheless, physicians 
should document the encounter, offer 
support, and have resources available 
for assistance.
Offer support, and acknowledge the 
courage it takes to discuss abuse. 
Assess the safety of the woman and 
of any children involved, introduce 
the concept of an emergency 
plan, and encourage the use of 
community resources. If the patient 
consents, report the abuse to relevant 
authorities.
140 ETHICS AND LEGAL ISSUESHIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.05_Step2CK_Ethics_10e_135-142.indd   140 8/23/18   1:09 PM

=== PAGE 158 ===
Malpractice
The essential elements of a civil suit under negligence include the 4 D’s:
■ The physician has a Duty to the patient.
■ Dereliction  of duty occurs.
■ There is Damage to the patient.
■ Dereliction is the Direct cause of damage.
Unlike a criminal suit, in which the burden of proof is “beyond a reason-
able doubt,” the burden of proof in a malpractice suit is “a preponderance of 
the evidence.”
Physicians may refuse inappropriate requests, such as demanding to be 
seen after hours. The physician should set clear limits and professional bound-
aries while remaining calm. If the patient has a nonurgent condition, the phy-
sician should not recommend that the patient visit the emergency department.
 KEY FACT
Physicians are not obligated to accept 
everyone coming to them as a patient. 
Furthermore, physicians have the right 
to end a doctor-patient relationship but 
must give the patient the resources and 
time to find another physician.
 MNEMONIC
The 4 D’s of malpractice—
Duty
Dereliction
Damage
Direct cause
141ETHICS AND LEGAL ISSUES HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.05_Step2CK_Ethics_10e_135-142.indd   141 8/23/18   1:09 PM

=== PAGE 159 ===
NOTES
142 ETHICS AND LEGAL ISSUESHIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.05_Step2CK_Ethics_10e_135-142.indd   142 8/23/18   1:09 PM

=== PAGE 160 ===
Esophageal Disease 144
Dysphagia/ODynOphagia 144
infectiOus esOphagitis 144
Diffuse (Distal) esOphageal spasm 145
achalasia 145
esOphageal Diverticula 146
esOphageal cancer 147
gastrOesOphageal reflux Disease 147
hiatal hernia 148
Disorders of the Stomach and Duodenum 149
gastritis 149
gastric cancer 150
peptic ulcer Disease 150
ZOllinger-ellisOn synDrOme 151
Disorders of the Small Bowel 151
Diarrhea 151
malabsOrptiOn/malDigestiOn 154
lactOse intOlerance 154
carcinOiD synDrOme 154
irritable bOwel synDrOme 155
small bOwel ObstructiOn 155
ileus 156
mesenteric ischemia 157
appenDicitis 157
Disorders of the Large Bowel 158
Diverticular Disease 158
large bOwel ObstructiOn 158
cOlOrectal cancer 159
ischemic cOlitis 161
pilOniDal Disease 161
Gastrointestinal Bleeding 161
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
 161
Hernias
 
163
Biliary Disease
 165
chOlelithiasis anD biliary cOlic 165
acute chOlecystitis 166
chOleDOchOlithiasis 167
acute chOlangitis 167
gallstOne ileus 167
Liver Disease 168
abnOrmal liver functiOn tests 168
hepatitis 168
cirrhOsis 171
primary sclerOsing chOlangitis 173
primary biliary chOlangitis 173
nOnalcOhOlic fatty liver Disease 174
hepatOcellular carcinOma 174
hemOchrOmatOsis 175
wilsOn Disease (hepatOlenticular DegeneratiOn) 176
Pancreatic Disease 176
insulinOma 176
VIPOma 177
pancreatitis 177
pancreatic cancer 177
143
HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
GASTROINTESTINAL
2019_02.06_Step2CK_Gastro_10e_143-178.indd   143 8/23/18   1:09 PM

=== PAGE 161 ===
Esophageal Disease
DYSPHAGIA/ODYNOPHAGIA
Difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) or pain with swallowing (odynophagia) caused 
by abnormalities of the oropharynx or esophagus.
Oropharyngeal Dysphagia
■ Problem with initiation of swallowing; may lead to aspiration of food into 
the lungs.
■ Etiology:  Neurologic or muscular, including stroke, Parkinson disease, 
myasthenia gravis, prolonged intubation, and Zenker diverticula.
■ Usually more of a problem with liquids than with solids.
■ Best initial test:  Modified barium swallow (video fluoroscopic swallowing 
exam). Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) may also be appropriate.
Esophageal Dysphagia
■ Can be caused by an obstruction (eg, strictures, Schatzki rings, webs, carci -
noma) or motility disorder (eg, achalasia, scleroderma, esophageal spasm).
■ Obstructions usually more of a problem with solids than with liquids; 
while motility disorders cause both solid and liquid food dysphagia.
■ Best initial test: EGD; consider pre-EGD barium swallow (aka esopha-
gram) if history of esophageal radiation or strictures as these patients may 
be at higher risk for esophageal perforation (Boerhaave syndrome). May be 
followed by manometry in some cases.
INFECTIOUS ESOPHAGITIS
Seen in immunocompromised patients. Table 2.6-1 outlines the etiology, 
diagnosis, and treatment of infectious esophagitis.
 KEY FACT
In an immunocompromised person 
with odynophagia, consider candidiasis.
 KEY FACT
Esophageal webs are associated with 
iron deficiency anemia and glossitis 
(Plummer-Vinson syndrome).
Etiologic AgEnt ExAm Findings UppEr Endoscopy trEAtmEnt
Candida albicans
A
± oral thrush  
(see Image A)
Yellow-white plaques adherent to the mucosa Fluconazole PO (treat with 
more than a topical agent 
alone)
Herpes simplex virus Oral ulcers Small, deep ulcerations; multinucleated giant cells 
with intranuclear inclusions on biopsy + Tzanck smear
Acyclovir IV
Cytomegalovirus Retinitis, colitis Large, linear, superficial ulcerations; intranuclear and 
intracytoplasmic inclusions on biopsy
Ganciclovir IV
Image reproduced with permission from Kantarjian HM, et al. MD Anderson Manual of Medical Oncology. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2006.
TABLE 2.6-1.  C auses of Infectious Esophagitis
144 GASTROINTESTINALHIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.06_Step2CK_Gastro_10e_143-178.indd   144 8/23/18   1:09 PM

=== PAGE 162 ===
Remember that esophagitis may also be caused by medications, especially 
tetracyclines, bisphosphonates, NSAIDs, and potassium chloride.
DIFFUSE (DISTAL) ESOPHAGEAL SPASM
Motility disorder in which normal peristalsis is periodically interrupted by 
high-amplitude nonperistaltic contractions (see Figure 2.6-1A).
History/PE
Presents with heartburn, chest pain, dysphagia, and odynophagia. Often pre-
cipitated by ingestion of hot or cold liquids; relieved by nitroglycerin.
Diagnosis
■ Barium swallow:  Shows a corkscrew-shaped esophagus.
■ Esophageal manometry (most accurate test):  High-amplitude, simultane-
ous contractions in greater than 20% of swallows.
trEatmEnt
■ Symptomatic relief: Calcium channel blockers, tricyclic antidepressants 
(TCAs), or nitrates.
■ Severe, incapacitating symptoms:  Surgery (esophageal myotomy) but has 
limited utility.
ACHALASIA
■ Motility disorder of the esophagus characterized by impaired relaxation of 
the lower esophageal sphincter (LES) and loss of peristalsis in the distal 
two-thirds of the esophagus.
■ Etiology:  Degeneration of the inhibitory neurons in the myenteric (Auer-
bach) plexus.
History/PE
Progressive dysphagia (solids and liquids), chest pain, regurgitation of undi-
gested food, weight loss, and nocturnal cough.
 KEY FACT
Candida esophagitis is an AIDS-defining 
illness.
 KEY FACT
The musculature of the upper one-third 
of the esophagus is skeletal, whereas 
that of the lower two-thirds is smooth 
muscle.
FIGURE 2.6-1.  Esophageal disease on barium esophagram. (A) Esophageal spasm. 
(B) Achalasia. Note the dilated esophagus tapering to a “bird’s beak” narrowing (arrows) at the 
LES. (C) Barrett esophagus with adenocarcinoma. Note the nodular mucosa of Barrett esopha-
gus (arrow) and the raised filling defect (arrowhead) representing adenocarcinoma in this 
patient. (D) Peptic stricture (arrows) 2° to GERD above a hiatal hernia (right).
 (Image A reproduced 
with permission from USMLE-Rx.com. Image B reproduced with permission from Doherty GM. Current Diagnosis & Treatment: 
Surgery, 13th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2010. Images C and D reproduced with permission from Chen MY et al. Basic 
Radiology, 1st ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2004.)
A
 D
B
 C
145GASTROINTESTINAL HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.06_Step2CK_Gastro_10e_143-178.indd   145 8/23/18   1:09 PM

=== PAGE 163 ===
Diagnosis
■ Best initial test:  Barium swallow; shows esophageal dilation with a “bird’s 
beak” tapering of the distal esophagus (see Figure 2.6-1B).
■ Most accurate test:  Manometry; shows ↑ resting LES pressure, incom-
plete LES relaxation upon swallowing, and ↓ peristalsis in the body of the 
esophagus (see Figure 2.6-2).
■ EGD to rule out structural disorders beyond achalasia (ie, mechanical 
obstruction) that may present similarly to achalasia (pseudoachalasia), 
especially cancer.
trEatmEnt
■ Short term:  Nitrates, calcium channel blockers, or endoscopic injection 
of botulinum toxin into the LES.
■ Long term:  Pneumatic balloon dilation or surgical (Heller) myotomy.
ESOPHAGEAL DIVERTICULA
■ Diverticula can be present in any location. Zenker diverticulum is 
defined as cervical outpouching through the cricopharyngeus muscle and 
is a posterior, false diverticulum (outpouching only through submucosa 
and mucosa).
FIGURE 2.6-2.  Achalasia. Manometry with incomplete LES relaxation. (Reproduced with 
permission from Farrokhi F, Vaezi MF. Idiopathic (primary) achalasia. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2007;2:38.)
Wet swallow
LES pressure
(mm Hg)
Proximal
esophageal
pressure
(mm Hg)
Distal
esophageal
pressure
(mm Hg)
15 sec
100
100
100
100
100
0
0
0
0
0
146 GASTROINTESTINALHIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.06_Step2CK_Gastro_10e_143-178.indd   146 8/23/18   1:09 PM

=== PAGE 164 ===
■ Hx/PE:  Chest pain, dysphagia, halitosis, and regurgitation of undigested 
food.
■ Dx:  Barium swallow will demonstrate outpouchings.
■ Tx:  If symptomatic, treat with surgical excision of the diverticulum. For 
Zenker diverticulum, myotomy of the cricopharyngeus is required to relieve 
the high-pressure zone.
ESOPHAGEAL CANCER
■ Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most common type of esophageal 
cancer worldwide. Adenocarcinoma is the most common type of esopha-
geal cancer in United States, Europe, and Australia.
■ Risk factors:
■ SCC:  Alcohol, tobacco use, and nitrosamines.
■ Adenocarcinoma:  Barrett esophagus (columnar metaplasia of the dis-
tal esophagus 2° to chronic GERD).
History/PE
Progressive dysphagia, initially to solids and later to liquids, is common. Weight 
loss, odynophagia, GERD, GI bleeding, and vomiting are also seen.
Diagnosis
■ Best initial test:  Barium study. Narrowing of esophagus with an irregular 
border protruding into the lumen (see Figure 2.6-1C).
■ Most accurate test:  EGD with biopsy; required to establish the diagnosis.
■ CT and endoscopic ultrasound for tumor staging.
trEatmEnt
■ Best initial treatment:  Chemoradiation and surgical resection.
■ Resection is also indicated in cases of high-grade Barrett dysplasia. Has a 
poor prognosis
.
GASTROESOPHAGEAL REFLUX DISEASE
Symptomatic reflux of gastric contents into the esophagus, most commonly 
from transient LES relaxation. Can also result from an incompetent LES, gas-
troparesis, or hiatal hernia.
History/PE
■ Hx:  Heartburn that commonly occurs 30–90 minutes after a meal, wors-
ens with reclining, and often improves with antacids, sitting, or standing; 
sour taste; a globus sensation; unexplained cough; morning hoarseness; 
and chest pain mimicking coronary artery disease.
■ PE:  Normal unless a systemic disease (eg, scleroderma) is present.
Diagnosis
■ Primarily a clinical diagnosis, with empirical treatment first (see below for 
lifestyle modification and medical treatment).
■ Most accurate test:  24-hour pH monitoring with impedance; indicated if 
the diagnosis is uncertain.
■ EGD with biopsy:  Performed in patients whose symptoms are the following:
■ Refractory to initial empiric therapy.
■ Long-standing (to rule out Barrett esophagus and adenocarcinoma; see 
Figure 2.6-3).
 KEY FACT
Esophageal cancer metastasizes early, 
because the esophagus lacks a serosa.
 KEY FACT
SCC of the esophagus tends to occur 
in the upper and middle thirds of the 
esophagus, whereas adenocarcinoma 
occurs in the lower third.
FIGURE 2.6-3.  Barrett esophagus 
on upper endoscopy. Shown is an irreg-
ular Z line (squamocolumnar junction 
between the esophagus and stomach) 
caused by columnar metaplasia of the 
lower esophagus. 
(Reproduced with permission 
from Fauci AS et al. Harrison’s Principles of Internal 
Medicine, 17th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2008.)
147GASTROINTESTINAL HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.06_Step2CK_Gastro_10e_143-178.indd   147 8/23/18   1:09 PM

=== PAGE 165 ===
■ Associated with alarm symptoms like blood in the stool, weight loss, 
dysphagia/odynophagia (signs of obstruction), or chest pain
.
■ Other studies:  Indicated for refractory symptoms or if concern for other 
causes. May include barium swallow (may demonstrate reflux see 
Figure 2.6-1D) or esophageal manometry.
trEatmEnt
■ Lifestyle modifications:  Indicated for all patients. Includes weight loss, 
head-of-bed elevation, small but frequent meals, avoidance of nocturnal 
meals, avoidance of substances like alcohol, chocolate, or coffee that ↓ 
LES tone.
■ Pharmacologic:
■ Mild/intermittent:  Antacids.
■ Chronic/frequent:  H 2-receptor antagonists (cimetidine, ranitidine) or 
proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) (omeprazole, lansoprazole).
■ Severe/erosive:  PPIs first; if refractory, Nissen fundoplication surgery 
may be of benefit.
■ Complications:  Erosive esophagitis, esophageal peptic stricture, aspira-
tion pneumonia, upper GI bleeding, Barrett esophagus.
HIATAL HERNIA
■ Herniation of stomach upward into the chest through the diaphragm.
■ Common types:
■ Sliding hiatal hernia (95%): Gastroesophageal junction and a portion 
of the stomach are displaced above the diaphragm (see Figure 2.6-4).
■ Paraesophageal hiatal hernia (5 %): Gastroesophageal junction remains 
below the diaphragm, while the fundus herniates into the thorax (see 
Figure 2.6-4).
■ Hx/PE:  May be asymptomatic. Patients with sliding hernias may pre  sent 
with GERD; paraesophageal hernias can cause strangulation.
■ Dx:  Incidental finding on chest x-ray (CXR); also frequently diagnosed by 
barium swallow or EGD.
■ Tx:
■ Sliding hernias:  Medical therapy and lifestyle modifications to 
↓ GERD symptoms.
■ Paraesophageal hernias:  Surgical gastropexy to prevent gastric 
volvulus.
 KEY FACT
GERD can also mimic angina or 
myocardial infarction.
 KEY FACT
GERD is not a result of the presence of 
Helicobacter pylori. GERD arises from a 
transient relaxation of the LES.
Herniated
gastric cardia
A
Herniated
gastric fundus
B
FIGURE 2.6-4.  (A) Sliding hiatal and (B) paraesophageal hiatal hernia. (Reproduced with 
permission from USMEL-Rx.com.)
148 GASTROINTESTINALHIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.06_Step2CK_Gastro_10e_143-178.indd   148 8/23/18   1:09 PM

=== PAGE 166 ===
Disorders of the Stomach and Duodenum
GASTRITIS
Inflammation of the gastric mucosa. Subtypes:
■ Acute gastritis:  Rapidly developing, superficial or deep erosive lesions, 
often caused by NSAID use, alcohol, H pylori infection, and stress from 
severe illness (eg, burns, CNS injury). Toxic ingestion can also cause 
acute gastritis along with possible gastric outlet stricture.
■ Chronic  gastritis:
■ Type A (10 %): Occurs in the fundus and is caused by autoantibodies 
to parietal cells. Causes pernicious anemia and is associated with other 
autoimmune disorders and ↑ risk for gastric adenocarcinoma and car-
cinoid tumors.
■ Type B (90 %): Occurs in the antrum and may be caused by NSAIDs 
or H pylori infection. Often asymptomatic, but associated with ↑ risk 
for peptic ulcer disease (PUD) and gastric cancer. Note: H pylori infec-
tion can but does not always cause gastritis.
History/PE
Asymptomatic or symptoms of epigastric pain, nausea, vomiting, hemateme-
sis, or melena.
Diagnosis
Upper endoscopy is required to diagnose acute gastritis. Different tests for 
H pylori are shown in the Table 2.6-2.
trEatmEnt
■ Stop intake of exacerbating agents such as NSAIDs or alcohol.
■ Antacids, sucralfate, H2 receptor blockers, and/or PPIs may help.
 KEY FACT
Type A gastritis is associated with 
pernicious anemia caused by lack 
of intrinsic factor necessary for the 
absorption of vitamin B
12.
 KEY FACT
Stress ulcers include Curling ulcers, 
which are associated with burn 
injuries, and Cushing ulcers, which are 
associated with traumatic brain injury.
 KEY FACT
H pylori antibodies stay ⊕ even when 
the infection is cleared. Use the urea 
breath test or a repeat stool antigen as 
a test of cure.
 KEY FACT
Consider peptic ulcer disease or 
gastritis in elderly patients who are 
taking medications for arthritis or heart 
disease (eg, NSAIDs) who present with 
abdominal pain or GI bleeding.
tEst dEscription tEst chArActEristics
Serology Detects IgG antibodies to H pylori High sensitivity, high specificity
Cannot distinguish between 
treated and active disease
Urea breath 
test
H pylori urease converts radio-labeled 
urea (C14 or C13) to CO2 and ammonia; 
this test detects CO2 formed from urea 
metabolism
High specificity, lower sensitivity
PPIs may cause false ⊝ results
Stool 
antigen 
test
Detects H pylori antigens in stool High specificity, high sensitivity
Cost-effective initial test for 
H pylori
Endoscopic 
biopsy
Detects H pylori on histology or culture. 
Can also detect intestinal metaplasia, 
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue 
(MALT), or widespread gastritis
Gold standard for diagnosis of 
gastritis and H pylori
Most invasive test
TABLE 2.6-2.  T ests for H pylori
149GASTROINTESTINAL HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.06_Step2CK_Gastro_10e_143-178.indd   149 8/23/18   1:09 PM

=== PAGE 167 ===
■ Administer triple therapy (amoxicillin, clarithromycin, omeprazole) to 
treat H 
pylori infection unless the patient is allergic to penicillin, in which 
case metronidazole should be substituted for amoxicillin.
■ Give prophylactic PPIs to patients at risk for stress ulcers (eg, ICU patients).
GASTRIC CANCER
■ Malignant tumor (mostly adenocarcinoma) with a poor prognosis that is 
particularly common in Korea and Japan
.
■ Risk factors: Diet high in nitrites and salt and low in fresh vegetables 
(antioxidants), H pylori colonization, and chronic gastritis.
■ Hx/PE:  Early-stage disease is usually asymptomatic but may be associated 
with indigestion and loss of appetite.
■ Late-stage disease presents with alarm symptoms: abdominal pain, 
weight loss, and upper GI bleeding.
■ Dx:  Upper endoscopy with biopsy (most accurate test) to rule out other 
etiologies and confirm the diagnosis.
■ Tx:  If detected early, treatment is surgical resection. Most patients present 
with late-stage, incurable disease. Five-year survival rate is < 10% for 
advanced disease.
PEPTIC ULCER DISEASE
■ Results from damage to the gastric or duodenal mucosa caused by 
impaired mucosal defense and/or 
↑ acidic gastric contents.
■ Risk factors:  H pylori (> 90% of duodenal ulcers and 70% of gastric 
ulcers), NSAIDs, alcohol, and tobacco use; concomitant use of corticoste-
roids and NSAIDs; male gender.
History/PE
■ Presentation:  Chronic or periodic dull, burning epigastric pain that is 
often related to meals and can radiate to the back; nausea; hematemesis 
(“coffee-ground” emesis); or melena (blood in the stool).
■ PE:  Usually normal but may reveal epigastric tenderness and stool guaiac.
■ Risks:  Acute perforation (rigid abdomen, rebound tenderness, and/or 
guarding).
Diagnosis
■ Most accurate test:  Upper endoscopy with biopsy is the most accurate test. 
It can also be used to test for H pylori infection and to rule out active bleed-
ing or gastric adenocarcinoma (10% of gastric ulcers without perforation).
■ H pylori  testing. See Table 2.6-2.
■ If perforation is suspected , perform upright CXR (see Figure 2.6-5) to eval-
uate air under the diaphragm or CT scan of the abdomen.
■ In recurrent or refractory cases, check serum gastrin levels to screen for 
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.
trEatmEnt
■ Acute  management:
■ If perforation is suspected:  Perform x-ray of the abdomen (initial test) 
to rule out free air under the diaphragm. Consider CT (definitive test) 
if x-ray of the abdomen shows no perforation but there is high clinical 
suspicion. Then, surgery if perforation is confirmed on CT. Carefully 
monitor BP.
 KEY FACT
A gastric adenocarcinoma that 
metastasizes to the ovary is called a 
Krukenberg tumor.
 KEY FACT
MALT lymphoma is a rare gastric 
tumor that presents in patients with 
chronic H pylori infection. It is the only 
malignancy that can be cured with 
antibiotics. Treat with triple therapy.
 KEY FACT
Gastric cancer may present with 
Virchow node (an enlarged left 
supraclavicular lymph node) or a 
Sister Mary Joseph node (a palpable 
lymph node near the umbilicus).
 KEY FACT
After a meal, pain from a Gastric ulcer 
is Greater, whereas Duodenal pain 
Decreases.
FIGURE 2.6-5.  Pneumoperitoneum. 
Upright chest x-ray (CXR) reveals free air 
under the diaphragm. (Reproduced with permis-
sion from USMLE-Rx.com.)
150 GASTROINTESTINALHIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.06_Step2CK_Gastro_10e_143-178.indd   150 8/23/18   1:09 PM

=== PAGE 168 ===
■ Rule out active bleeding:  Serial hematocrits (initially), rectal vault 
exam, NG suction. Monitor BP and treat with IV hydration, blood 
transfusion, and IV PPIs. Then, perform an urgent EGD (definitive) to 
control suspected bleeding.
■ Long-term  management:
■ Medical therapy goals:  Protect the mucosa, ↓ acid production, and 
eradicate H pylori infection.
■ Mild disease: Treat with antacids, PPIs, or H2-blockers.
■ H pylori  infection: Triple therapy (omeprazole, clarithromycin, and 
amoxicillin).
■ Discontinue exacerbating agents (alcohol, tobacco).
■ Endoscopy with targeted biopsy: Indicated in patients with symptoms 
refractory to medical therapy to rule out gastric cancer.
■ Surgical therapy (eg, parietal cell vagotomy):  Severe cases refractory to 
medical therapy.
ComPliCations
Hemorrhage (most likely from posterior ulcers that erode into the gastroduo-
denal artery), gastric outlet obstruction (presenting with succussion splash), 
perforation, intractable pain.
ZOLLINGER-ELLISON SYNDROME
■ Rare condition characterized by gastrin-producing tumors in the duode -
num and/or pancreas that lead to excessive secretion of gastrin and recur-
rent or intractable ulcers.
■ Hx/PE:  Unresponsive, recurrent gnawing, burning abdominal pain; diar-
rhea; nausea; vomiting; fatigue; weakness; weight loss; and GI bleeding.
■ Dx:  ↑ Fasting serum gastrin levels and ↑ gastrin with the administration of 
secretin are diagnostic; CT is indicated to characterize and stage disease. 
Nuclear octreotide scan can also be used to facilitate localization of 
gastrinomas.
■ Tx:  Moderate- to high-dose PPIs to control symptoms. Surgical resection 
of the gastrinoma if not metastatic.
Disorders of the Small Bowel
DIARRHEA
■ The most common mechanisms are malabsorption/osmotic, secretory, 
inflammatory/infectious, and 
↑ motility. (See also Tables 2.6-3 and 2.6-4).
 KEY FACT
A biopsy must be performed on all 
gastric ulcers to rule out malignancy.
 KEY FACT
Misoprostol can help patients with PUD 
who require NSAID therapy (eg, for 
arthritis).
 KEY FACT
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome:
■ H ypercalcemia from 
hyperparathyroidism (In 20%, 
gastrinomas are associated with 
MEN type 1).
■ Epigastr ic pain (peptic ulcer).
■ Diar rhea (caused by mucosal 
damage and pancreatic 
enzyme inactivation leading to 
malabsorption).
stool osmotic gAp dEscription ExAmplEs
Low osmotic gap (< 50 mOsm/kg) Secretory diarrhea: ↑ Secretion or inhibition 
of absorption of water
Bacterial toxins (eg, cholera, Escherichia coli), VIPoma, 
gastrinoma, medullary cancer of thyroid
High osmotic gap (> 100 mOsm/kg) Osmotic diarrhea: Osmotically active com-
pounds in bowel draw in water
Celiac disease, Whipple disease, pancreatic insuffi-
ciency, laxative abuse
TABLE 2.6-3.  T ypes of Stool Osmotic Gap
151GASTROINTESTINAL HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.06_Step2CK_Gastro_10e_143-178.indd   151 8/23/18   1:09 PM

=== PAGE 169 ===
■ Stool electrolytes:  Primarily sodium and potassium (normal stool osmotic 
gap is 50–100 mOsm/kg).
Stool osmotic gap = 290 − 2 × (stool Na + stool K)
History/PE
■ Acute diarrhea: Acute onset with a duration of < 2 weeks; usually infec-
tious and self-limited.
■ Multiple pathogens may be responsible (see Table 2.6-4).
 KEY FACT
Cryptosporidium and Isospora are 
associated with chronic diarrhea in 
patients with HIV/AIDS.inFEctioUs 
AgEnt history
ExAm And tEst rEsUl ts 
(notE: All hAvE FEcAl 
rBcs And WBcs) commEnts trEAtmEnt
Campylobacter The most common etiology 
of bacterial diarrhea
Caused by ingestion of con-
taminated food or water
Affects young children and 
young adults; generally 
lasts 7–10 days
Frequently presents with 
bloody diarrhea
Rule out appendicitis and 
inflammatory bowel 
disease (IBD)
Supportive treatment first, 
then fluoroquinolones 
(eg, ciprofloxacin) or 
azithromycin
Clostridium 
difficile
Associated with recent 
treatment with anti-
biotics (penicillins, 
quinolones, clindamycin)
Affects hospitalized adult 
patients
Watch for toxic megacolon 
(seen on x-ray of the 
abdomen)
Presents with fever, 
abdominal pain, and 
possible systemic 
toxicity
Most commonly causes 
colitis, but can involve the 
small bowel
Identify C difficile toxin in the 
stool
Sigmoidoscopy shows 
pseudomembranes
Cessation of the inciting 
antibiotic
Treat with PO metronida-
zole (mild disease), PO 
vancomycin (moderate-
severe disease), or IV 
metronidazole ± rectal 
vancomycin (if ileus)
PO fidaxomicin useful 
when there are multiple 
relapses on previous 
antibiotics
Echinococcus 
granulosus
Contracted from close 
contact with dogs, defini-
tive host for tapeworm. 
Causes simple liver cysts
“Eggshell calcification” on 
CT scan
Usually found incidentally, 
but may cause mild right 
upper quadrant (RUQ) 
pain caused by compres-
sion of other structures
Cyst aspiration may cause 
cyst rupture and anaphy-
lactic shock
Surgical resection and 
albendazole
Entamoeba 
histolytica
Caused by ingestion of con-
taminated food or water; 
look for a history of travel 
in developing countries
The incubation period can 
last up to 3 months
Presents with severe 
abdominal pain and 
fever
Endoscopy shows “flask-
shaped” ulcers
Chronic amebic colitis mimics 
IBD
Steroids can lead to fatal 
perforation
Treat with metronidazole
TABLE 2.6-4.  C auses of Infectious Diarrhea
(continues)
152 GASTROINTESTINALHIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.06_Step2CK_Gastro_10e_143-178.indd   152 8/23/18   1:09 PM

=== PAGE 170 ===
■ Common causes of pediatric diarrhea are rotavirus, Norwalk virus, and 
enterovirus infection.
■ Chronic diarrhea:  Insidious onset with a duration of > 4 weeks.
■ Secretory:  Carcinoid tumors, VIPomas.
■ Malabsorption/maldigestive/osmotic:  Bacterial overgrowth, pancre-
atic insufficiency, mucosal damage, lactose intolerance, celiac disease, 
laxative abuse (presents with dark brown colonic discoloration), post-
surgical short bowel syndrome.
■ Inflammatory/infectious:  Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), giardia-
sis, amoebic dysentery.
■ Increased motility:  Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).
Diagnosis
■ Acute diarrhea:  No further studies are indicated unless the patient has a 
high fever, bloody diarrhea, or diarrhea lasting > 4–5 days.
 KEY FACT
Organisms that cause bloody diarrhea 
include Salmonella, Shigella, E coli 
(EHEC), and Campylobacter.
 KEY FACT
Organisms that cause watery diarrhea 
include Vibrio cholerae, rotavirus, E coli 
(ETEC), Cryptosporidium, Giardia, and 
norovirus.
TABLE 2.6-4.  C auses of Infectious Diarrhea (continued)
inFEctioUs 
AgEnt history
ExAm And tEst rEsUl ts 
(notE: All hAvE FEcAl 
rBcs And WBcs) commEnts trEAtmEnt
E coli O157:H7 Caused by ingestion of 
contaminated food (raw 
meat)
Affects children and the 
elderly; generally lasts 
5–10 days
Presents with severe 
abdominal pain, 
low-grade fever, and 
vomiting
It is important to rule out 
GI bleeding and ischemic 
colitis
Hemolytic uremic syndrome 
(HUS) is a potential compli-
cation, primarily in children
Avoid antibiotic or antidiar-
rheal therapy, which ↑ 
HUS risk
Salmonella Caused by ingestion of 
contaminated poultry or 
eggs
Affects young children and 
the elderly; generally 
lasts 2–5 days
Presents with a pro-
dromal headache, fever, 
myalgia, and abdominal 
pain
Sepsis is a concern, as 
5–10% of patients become 
bacteremic
Sickle cell patients are sus-
ceptible to invasive disease 
leading to osteomyelitis
First fluids. Treat bacte-
remia or at-risk patients 
(eg, sickle cell patients) 
with oral quinolone or 
TMP-SMX
Shigella Extremely contagious; trans-
mitted between people 
by the fecal-oral route
Affects young children and 
institutionalized patients
May lead to severe 
dehydration
Can also cause febrile sei-
zures in the very young
Treat with TMP-SMX to ↓ 
person-to-person spread
Taenia solium Pork tapeworm. Acquired 
by ingestion of under-
cooked pork
Presents with signs of 
elevated intracranial 
pressure (headaches, 
vomiting, seizures, visual 
changes)
Diagnosed via CT or mag-
netic resonance imaging 
(MRI) showing several cysts 
with edema
Treat with albendazole 
and with symptomatic 
management of CNS 
symptoms
Trichinella Acquired by ingestion of 
undercooked meat in 
developing countries 
(especially Mexico and 
Thailand)
Classic triad of myositis, 
periorbital edema, and 
eosinophilia
Multiorgan involvement is 
possible
153GASTROINTESTINAL HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.06_Step2CK_Gastro_10e_143-178.indd   153 8/23/18   1:09 PM

=== PAGE 171 ===
■ Chronic diarrhea:  History/physical exam to narrow the differential diag-
nosis. Additional studies include the following:
■ Stool analysis:  Leukocytes, culture, C difficile toxin, and ova and para-
site exam (O&P).
trEatmEnt
■ Acute  diarrhea: Oral rehydration is key. Antibiotics are not indicated 
(except in C difficile infection, or in the epidemic setting), because they 
do not shorten the course of illness.
■ Chronic diarrhea:  Treatment is etiology specific.
MALABSORPTION/MALDIGESTION
■ Inability to absorb macro- and/or micronutrients. Common etiologies 
include the following:
■ Mucosal abnormalities:  Celiac disease (associated with dermatitis her-
petiformis; see Figure 2.6-6), Whipple disease (also presents with 
arthritis, lymphadenopathy, cardiac issues, PAS positive granules in 
lamina propria on biopsy), tropical sprue.
■ Bile salt deficiency:  Ileal disease in Crohn disease or small bowel 
resections (> 100 cm of terminal ileum), bacterial overgrowth.
■  Other:  Pancreatic insufficiency, short bowel syndrome.
■ Hx/PE:  Presents with pale, foul-smelling, bulky stools (steatorrhea or fat 
maldigestion) associated with abdominal pain, flatus, bloating, weight loss, 
nutritional deficiencies, and fatigue.
■ Dx:  Multiple laboratory tests based on the clinical suspicion. Biopsy is 
definitive.
■ Tx:  Etiology dependent. In severe cases, patients may require TPN, 
immunosuppressants, and anti-inflammatory medications.
LACTOSE INTOLERANCE
■ Common among populations of African, Asian, and Native American 
descent, also transiently after an acute episode of gastroenteritis.
■ Hx/PE:  Presents with abdominal bloating, flatulence, cramping, and 
watery diarrhea following milk ingestion.
■ Dx:  Often treated empirically with lactose-free diet. Hydrogen breath test 
reveals ↑ hydrogen following the ingestion of lactose.
■ Tx:  Avoidance of dairy products; oral lactase enzyme replacement.
CARCINOID SYNDROME
■ Carcinoid syndrome is caused by metastasis of carcinoid tumors, which 
most commonly arise from the ileum and appendix and produce sero-
tonin. Prior to metastasis, most secreted hormones undergo first-pass 
metabolism by the liver and do not cause systemic symptoms.
■ Hx/PE:  Cutaneous flushing, diarrhea, abdominal cramps, wheezing, and 
right-sided cardiac valvular lesions are the most common manifestations.
■ Dx:  High urine levels of the serotonin metabolite 5-HIAA (best initial test) 
are diagnostic. CT and In-111 octreotide scans are used to localize the 
tumor.
■ Tx:  Treatment includes octreotide and surgical resection.
 KEY FACT
Diarrhea after ingestion of raw eggs or 
dairy: think Salmonella.
 KEY FACT
The initial tests specific for celiac 
disease are IgA anti-transglutaminase 
antibody or anti-endomysial antibody. 
The gold standard is intestinal biopsy.
 KEY FACT
Whipple disease shows PAS positive 
granules in lamina propria on biopsy.
 KEY FACT
The classic presentation of pellagra 
is the 4 D’s: Diarrhea, Dementia, 
Dermatitis, and Death.
 KEY FACT
Patients with carcinoid syndrome also 
develop niacin deficiency because 
tryptophan is metabolized into 
serotonin.
FIGURE 2.6-6.  Dermatitis her -
petiformis. Grouped, papulovesicular, 
pruritic skin lesions are shown. Lesions 
tend to be symmetrically located on the 
extensor surfaces of the elbows, knees, 
buttocks, and posterior scalp, and are 
associated with celiac disease. 
(Reproduced 
with permission from Caproni M et al. Celiac disease 
and dermatologic manifestations: many skin clues to 
unfold gluten-sensitive enteropathy. Gastroenterol Res 
Pract. 2012;2012:952753.)
154 GASTROINTESTINALHIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.06_Step2CK_Gastro_10e_143-178.indd   154 8/23/18   1:10 PM

=== PAGE 172 ===
IRRITABLE BOWEL SYNDROME
An idiopathic functional disorder that commonly affects women in their 20s 
to 30s; often patients have comorbid psychiatric disorders like depression, anx-
iety, and fibromyalgia.
History/PE
■ Patients present with abdominal pain that is relieved by bowel move -
ments, diarrhea and/or constipation, abdominal distention, and mucous 
stools. Symptoms often worsen with stress.
■ No alarm symptoms:  Rarely awakens patients from sleep; vomiting, signif-
icant weight loss, and constitutional symptoms are uncommon.
■ PE:  Usually unremarkable.
Diagnosis
■ Definition (per Rome III diagnostic criteria):  At least 3 days in 
3 months of episodic abdominal discomfort that is (two or more crite-
ria): (1)  relieved by defecation; (2) associated with a change in stool  
frequency or consistency; (3) associated with a change in stool 
appearance.
■ Exclude organic disorders such as IBD; increased prevalence of celiac dis -
ease in IBS, so celiac should be ruled out when IBS is suspected.
trEatmEnt
■ Psychosocial:  Patients benefit from a strong patient-physician relation-
ship. Physicians should offer reassurance and should not dismiss the 
symptoms.
■ Diet:  Fiber supplements (psyllium); exclude gas-producing foods.
■ Chronic constipation may lead to anal fissures. Treat with topical anes -
thetics and vasodilators.
■ Pharmacologic:  Symptomatic treatment with antispasmodics. TCAs and 
SSRIs may help. Long-term medical therapy is usually not indicated.
SMALL BOWEL OBSTRUCTION
Partial or complete blockage of passage of bowel contents through the small 
bowel.
■ Etiologies:  Adhesions (60% of cases), hernias (10–20%), neoplasms 
(10–20%), intussusception, gallstone ileus, stricture caused by IBD, and 
volvulus.
■ Partial small bowel obstruction (SBO):  Continued passage of flatus, but 
no stool.
■ Complete SBO:  No passage of flatus or stool (obstipation).
History/PE
■ Hx:  Crampy abdominal pain at 4- to 5-minute intervals; vomiting typically 
follows the pain.
■ Abdominal exam:  Distention, tenderness, prior surgical scars, or hernias, 
hyperactive bowel sounds (high-pitched tinkles and peristaltic rushes).
■ Complications:  Ischemic necrosis and bowel rupture with prolonged or 
complete obstruction. Patients present with peritonitis manifested by fever, 
hypotension, rebound tenderness, and tachycardia.
 KEY FACT
In the United States, the leading cause 
of SBO in children is hernia. The leading 
cause of SBO in adults is adhesions.
A 53-year-old woman with a history 
of carcinoid tumor of the appendix 
(status post-resection) presents to 
a local clinic with symmetric, dry, 
hyperpigmented skin lesions and 
persistent diarrhea. Her husband 
expresses concern that the patient 
does not seem to be herself anymore; 
he reports that she has been irritable, 
confused, and forgetful. What is the 
most likely diagnosis?
155GASTROINTESTINAL HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.06_Step2CK_Gastro_10e_143-178.indd   155 8/23/18   1:10 PM

=== PAGE 173 ===
Diagnosis
■ Best initial test: Abdominal x-ray demonstrates a stepladder pattern of 
dilated small bowel loops, air-fluid levels (see Figure 2.6-7), and a paucity 
of gas in the colon.
■ Most accurate test: CT scan of the abdomen to further characterize 
obstruction and evaluate for etiology.
■ CBC may demonstrate leukocytosis if there is ischemia or necrosis of 
bowel.
■ Lab tests often reveal dehydration. Lactic acidosis is a prognostic sign, as it 
suggests necrotic bowel.
trEatmEnt
■ Best initial treatment:  Fluid resuscitation.
■ Partial obstruction:  Supportive care may be sufficient and should include 
NPO status, NG suction, IV hydration, correction of electrolyte abnormal-
ities, Foley catheterization to monitor fluid status, and pain management; 
avoid opioids and anticholinergics (slow GI motility).
■ Complete obstruction:  Exploratory laparotomy indicated in complete 
SBO, ischemic necrosis, or refractory SBO symptoms.
ILEUS
■ Loss of peristalsis without structural obstruction.
■ Risk factors:  Recent surgery/GI procedures, severe medical illness, immobil-
ity, hypokalemia or other electrolyte imbalances, hypothyroidism, diabetes 
mellitus (DM), and medications that slow GI motility (eg, anticholinergics, 
opioids).
History/PE
■ Hx:  Diffuse, constant abdominal discomfort, nausea and vomiting, and an 
absence of flatus or bowel movements.
■ PE:  Diffuse tenderness, abdominal distention, and ↓  or absent bowel 
sounds; rectal exam required to rule out fecal impaction in elderly 
patients.
 KEY FACT
Gallstone ileus is a form of SBO that 
occurs when a gallstone lodges at the 
ileocecal valve.
A
 B
FIGURE 2.6-7.  Small bowel obstruction. (A) Supine x-ray of the abdomen shows dilated 
air-filled small bowel loops with relatively little gas in the colon. (B) Left lateral decubitus x-ray 
on the same patient demonstrates multiple air-fluid levels (arrows) at different levels. These are 
typical plain film findings of complete SBO. 
(Reproduced with permission from Doherty GM. Current Diagnosis 
& Treatment: Surgery, 13th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2010.)
Pellagra, a deficiency of vitamin B3 
(niacin), 2° to a recurrent carcinoid 
tumor. Carcinoid tumors produce 
serotonin, which is a derivative of 
tryptophan. However, tryptophan 
is also the precursor of niacin. In 
patients with carcinoid tumors, the 
tumor can be so active that most 
tryptophan is used for serotonin 
production, resulting in niacin 
deficiency.
156 GASTROINTESTINALHIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
2019_02.06_Step2CK_Gastro_10e_143-178.indd   156 8/23/18   1:10 PM

