--- PAGE 31 ---
NOTES
14 SECTION 1 GUIDE TO EFFICIENT EXAM PREPARATION
2019_01.01_Step2CK_Intro_10e_001-014.indd   14 8/23/18   12:16 PM
--- PAGE 32 ---
Cardiovascular
Dermatology
Endocrinology
Epidemiology
Ethics and Legal Issues
Gastrointestinal
Hematology/Oncology
Infectious Disease
Musculoskeletal
Neurology
Obstetrics
Gynecology
Pediatrics
Psychiatry
Pulmonary
Renal/Genitourinary
Selected Topics in Emergency Medicine
Rapid Review
15
SECTION 2
DATABASE OF HIGH-YIELD FACTS
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   15 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 33 ---
How to Use the Database
The tenth edition of First Aid for the USMLE Step 2 CK contains a revised 
and expanded database of clinical material that student authors and faculty 
have identified as high yield for boards review. The facts are organized 
according to subject matter, whether medical specialty (eg, Cardiovascular, 
Renal) or high-yield topic (eg, Ethics). Each subject is then divided into 
smaller subsections of related facts.
Individual facts are generally presented in a logical fashion, from basic 
definitions and epidemiology to History/Physical Exam, Diagnosis, and Treat-
ment. Lists, mnemonics, pull quotes, vignette flash cards, and tables are used 
when they can help the reader form key associations. In addition, color and 
black-and-white images are interspersed throughout the text. At the end of 
Section 2, we also feature a Rapid Review chapter consisting of key facts and 
classic associations that can be studied a day or two before the exam.
The content contained herein is useful primarily for the purpose of 
reviewing material already learned. The information presented is not ideal for 
learning complex or highly conceptual material for the first time.
The Database of High-Yield Facts is not meant to be comprehensive. Use 
it to complement your core study material, not as your primary study source. 
The facts and notes have been condensed and edited to emphasize essential 
material. Work with the material, add your own notes and mnemonics, and 
recognize that not all memory techniques work for all students.
We update Section 2 biannually to keep current with new trends in boards 
content as well as to expand our database of high-yield information. However, 
we must note that inevitably many other high-yield entries and topics are not 
yet included in our database.
We actively encourage medical students and faculty to submit entries and 
mnemonics so that we may enhance the database for future students. We also 
solicit recommendations of additional study tools that may be useful in pre-
paring for the exam, such as diagrams, charts, and computer-based tutorials 
(see How to Contribute, p. xiii).
DISCLAIMER
The entries in this section reflect student opinions of what is high yield. 
Owing to the diverse sources of material, no attempt has been made to trace 
or reference the origins of entries individually. We have regarded mnemonics 
as essentially in the public domain. All errors and omissions will gladly be 
corrected if brought to the attention of the authors, either through the pub-
lisher or directly by e-mail.
16   
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   16 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 34 ---
Electrocardiogram 18
Cardiac Physical Exam
 21
Arrhythmias
 
23
Bradyarrhythmias and ConduCtion aBnormalities 23
taChyarrhythmias 24
Congestive Heart Failure 25
systoliC dysfunCtion/heart failure with reduCed ejeCtion fraCtion 27
nonsystoliC dysfunCtion/heart failure  
with Preserved ejeCtion fraCtion 29
Cardiomyopathy 30
dilated CardiomyoPathy 30
hyPertroPhiC CardiomyoPathy 31
restriCtive CardiomyoPathy 32
Coronary Artery Disease 33
angina PeCtoris 33
Prinzmetal (variant) angina 34
Carotid artery stenosis 34
Acute Coronary Syndromes 35
unstaBle angina/non–st-segment elevation myoCardial infarCtion 35
st-segment elevation myoCardial infarCtion 36
Dyslipidemia 39
Hypertension
 
41
1° (essential) hyPertension 41
2° hyPertension 42
hyPertensive Crises 43
Pericardial Disease 45
PeriCarditis 45
CardiaC tamPonade 46
Valvular Heart Disease 47
Vascular Diseases
 47
aortiC aneurysm 47
aortiC disseCtion 49
deeP venous thromBosis 50
PeriPheral arterial disease 51
lymPhedema 52
Syncope 53
17
HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
CARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   17 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 35 ---
Electrocardiogram
Assesses the ECG for rate, rhythm, axis, intervals, ischemia, and chamber 
enlargement (see Figure 2.1-1).
Rate
Normal adult HR is 60–100 bpm. HR < 60 bpm is bradycardia. HR > 
100 bpm is tachycardia. Common causes of sinus bradycardia are physical fit-
ness, sick sinus syndrome, drugs, vasovagal attacks, acute MI, ↑ intracranial 
pressure. Common causes of sinus tachycardia are anxiety, anemia, pain, 
fever, sepsis, CHF, PE, hypovolemia, thyrotoxicosis, CO
2 retention, and 
sympathomimetics.
Rhythm
Sinus rhythm: Normal rhythm that originates from sinus node. It is charac-
terized by a P wave (upright in II, III, and aVF; inverted in aVR) preceding 
every QRS complex and a QRS complex following every P wave. Sinus 
arrhythmia is common in young adults.
Axis
Can be determined by examining the QRS in leads I, II, and aVF (see 
Table 2.1-1 and Figure 2.1-2).
 KEY FACT
At usual speed (25 = mm/s), each large 
square = 200 msec, and each small 
square = 40 msec.
 KEY FACT
Heart rate = 300/number of large 
boxes between two consecutive 
QRS complexes.
 MNEMONIC
Axis deviation—
RAD RALPH, the LAD from  
VILLA hates WOLVES
Right Axis Deviation
Right ventricular hypertrophy
Anterolateral MI
Left Posterior Hemiblock  
(also consider PE)
Left Axis Deviation
Ventricular tachycardia
Inferior myocardial infarction
Left ventricular hypertrophy
Left Anterior hemiblock
WOLVES – Wolf-Parkinson-White 
syndrome can cause BOTH
FIGURE 2.1-1.  Normal electrocardiogram from a healthy subject. (Reproduced with permission 
from USMLE-Rx.com.)
Lead I L ead II L ead aVF degrees
Normal axis ↑ ↑ ↑ ⊝30–⊕90
Left axis deviation ↑ ↓ ↓ ⊝30–⊝90
Right axis deviation ↓ ↑ ↑ ⊕90–⊕180
Extreme axis ↓ ↓ ↓ ⊝90–⊝180
TABLE 2.1-1.   A xis Deviation by ECG Findings
18 HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN CARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   18 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 36 ---
Intervals
■ PR interval:  Normally 120–200 msec (3–5 small boxes).
■ Prolonged =  delayed AV conduction (eg, first-degree heart block).
■ Short =  fast AV conduction down accessory pathway (eg, WPW 
syndrome).
■ QRS interval:  Normally < 120 msec. A normal Q wave is < 40 msec 
wide and < 2mm deep. Ventricular conduction defects can cause a 
widened QRS complex (> 120 msec):
■ Left bundle branch block (LBBB):  Deep S wave and no R wave in 
V1 (“W”-shaped); wide, tall and broad, or notched (“M”-shaped) 
R waves in I, V 5, and V 6 (see Figure 2.1-3). A new LBBB is patho-
logic and may be a sign of acute MI.
■ Right bundle branch block (RBBB):  RSR′ complex (“rabbit ears;” 
“M”-shaped); qR or R morphology with a wide R wave in V 1; QRS 
pattern with a wide S wave in I, V5, and V6 (see Figure 2.1-4).
■ QT interval: Normally QTc (the QT interval corrected for extremes in 
heart rate) is 380–440 msec (QTc = QT/√RR). Long QT syndrome 
(QTc > 440 msec) is an underdiagnosed congenital disorder that pre-
disposes to ventricular tachyarrhythmias. Other common causes of pro-
longed QTc: acute MI, bradycardia, myocarditis, ↓ K
+, ↓ Ca2+, ↓ Mg2+, 
congenital syndromes, head injury, drugs.
■ Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome:  Long QT syndrome due to a 
defect in K + channel conduction. Associated with sensorineural deaf-
ness. Treat with β-blockers and pacemaker.
Ischemia/Infarction
Acute ischemia:
■ Within hours, peaked T-waves and ST-segment changes (either depres -
sion or elevation).
■ Within 24 hours, T-wave inversion and ST-segment resolution.
■ Within a few days, pathologic Q waves ( > 40 msec or more than one-
third of the QRS amplitude). Q waves usually persist, but may resolve 
in 10% of patients. Because of this, Q waves signify either acute or prior 
ischemic events.
 MNEMONIC
Left bundle branch block—
WiLLiaM
V1 = W QRS pattern
V6 = M QRS pattern
Right bundle branch block—
MaRRoW
V1 = M QRS pattern
V6 = W QRS pattern
F IGURE 2.1-2 .  ECG axis interpretation. QRS axis and frontal leads. (Reproduced with per-
mission from USMLE-Rx.com.) 
RAD
Extreme
AXIS
Deviation
LAD
Normal
QRS AXIS
‒150
o
‒90
o
+ 120
o
+ 90
o
+ 60
o
‒30
o
0
o
aVF
aVL
I
IIIII
aVR
180
o V1
A
V6
B
FIGURE 2.1-3.  Left bundle branch 
block. Characteristic ECG findings are 
seen in leads V1 (A) and V6 (B). (Modified 
with permission from USMLE-Rx.com.)
V1
V6
A
B
FIGURE 2.1-4.  Right bundle 
branch block. Characteristic ECG find-
ings are seen in leads V1 (A) and V6 (B). 
(Modified with permission from USMLE-Rx.com.)
19HIGH-YIELD FACTS INCARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   19 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 37 ---
■ Non–Q-wave infarcts (also known as subendocardial infarcts) have ST and 
T changes without Q waves.
■ In a normal ECG, R waves increase in size compared to the S wave 
between 
leads V1 and V 5. Poor R-wave progression refers to diminished R 
waves in these precordial leads, and can be a sign of infarction, although it 
is not specific.
Chamber Enlargement
■ Atrial  enlargement:
■ Right atrial abnormality (P pulmonale):  The P-wave amplitude in 
lead II is > 2.5 mm.
■ Left atrial abnormality (P mitrale): The P-wave width in lead II is 
> 120 msec, or terminal ⊝ deflection in V 1 is > 1 mm in amplitude 
and > 40 msec in duration. Notched P waves can frequently be seen 
in lead II.
■ Left ventricular hypertrophy  (LVH; see Figure 2.1-5):
■ Amplitude of S in V1 + R in V5 or V6 is > 35 mm.
■ Alternative criteria:  The amplitude of R in aVL + S in V3 is > 28 mm 
in men or > 20 mm in women.
■ Usually associated with ST depression and T-wave changes .
 KEY FACT
■ P ulmonale causes Peaked P waves.
■ M itrale causes M-shaped P waves.
 MNEMONIC
Heart auscultation locations—
All Physicians Take Money
Aortic
Pulmonic
Tricuspid
Mitral
V1 V2 V5 V6
AB
FIGURE 2.1-5.  Left ventricular hypertrophy. Shown are leads V1, V2, V5, and  
V6. → S wave in V1 + R wave in V5 = 45 mm. Note ST changes and T-wave inversion in  
V5 and V6, suggesting strain. (Reproduced with permission from USMLE-Rx.com.)
1
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
7777
77
PA
M
Pulmonic
Aortic
Mitral
Tricuspid
T
FIGURE 2.1-6.  Auscultation locations. Auscultation sites are shown with associated valves. A, aortic valve; 
M, mitral valve; P, pulmonic valve; T, tricuspid valve. (Modified with permission from USMLE-Rx.com.)
20 HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN CARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   20 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 38 ---
■ Right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH):
■ Right-axis deviation and an R wave in V1 > 7 mm.
Cardiac Physical Exam
Key exam findings that can narrow the differential include the following:
■ Jugular venous distention  (JVD > 4 cm above the sternal angle): Most 
typically from volume overload, stemming from conditions such as right 
heart failure or pulmonary hypertension.
■ Hepatojugular reflux  (distention of neck veins upon applying pressure to 
the liver): Seen in same conditions as JVD.
■ Kussmaul sign  (↑ in jugular venous pressure [JVP] with inspiration): 
Often seen in constrictive pericarditis.
■ Systolic murmurs  (see Table 2.1-2 and Figures 2.1-6 and 2.1-7):
■ Aortic stenosis:  A harsh systolic ejection murmur that radiates to the 
carotids.
■ Mitral regurgitation:  A holosystolic murmur that radiates to the axilla.
■ Mitral valve prolapse:  A midsystolic or late systolic murmur with a pre-
ceding click.
■ Flow murmur:  Usually a soft murmur that is position-dependent (very 
common and does not imply cardiac disease).
■ Diastolic murmurs  (see Table 2.1-2 and Figures 2.1-6 and 2.1-7): Always 
abnormal.
■ Aortic regurgitation:  An early decrescendo murmur.
■ Mitral stenosis:  A mid to late low-pitched murmur.
■ Gallops:
■ S3 gallop:  A sign of fluid overload (ie, heart failure, mitral valve dis-
ease); often normal in younger patients and in high-output states (eg, 
pregnancy).
■ S4 gallop:  A sign of decreased compliance (ie, hypertension, aortic ste-
nosis, diastolic dysfunction); usually pathologic but can be normal in 
younger patients and in athletes.
■ Edema:
■ Pulmonary:  Left heart failure (fluid “backs up” into the lungs).
■ Peripheral:  Right heart failure and biventricular failure (fluid “backs 
up” into the periphery), nephrotic syndrome, hepatic disease, lymph-
edema, hypoalbuminemia, and drugs.
■ Hands:
■ Finger clubbing:  Congenital cyanotic heart disease; endocarditis.
■ Infective endocarditis:  Splinter hemorrhages; Osler nodes, Janeway 
lesions.
 KEY FACT
Axis deviation can be a sign of 
ventricular enlargement.
 KEY FACT
Right-sided murmurs increase with 
inspiration. Left-sided murmurs increase 
with expiration.
A college-age man passed out 
while playing basketball and had 
no prodromal symptoms or signs 
of seizure. His cardiac exam is 
unremarkable, and an ECG shows a 
slurred upstroke of the QRS. What are 
the next best steps?
systoLIc MurMurs dIastoLIc MurMurs
Aortic stenosis
Mitral regurgitation
Mitral valve prolapse
Tricuspid regurgitation
Aortic regurgitation
Mitral stenosis
TABLE 2.1-2.  C ardiac Murmurs
21HIGH-YIELD FACTS INCARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   21 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 39 ---
Arrhythmias
BRADYARRHYTHMIAS AND CONDUCTION ABNORMALITIES
Table 2.1-3 outlines the etiologies, clinical presentation, and treatment of 
common bradyarrhythmias and conduction abnormalities.
 MNEMONIC
Management options for atrial 
fibrillation—
ABCD
Anticoagulate
𝛃-blockers to control rate
Cardiovert/Calcium channel blockers
Digoxin (in refractory cases)
 KEY FACT
An atrial myxoma is a benign tumor 
of the heart, commonly found 
within the left and right atria on the 
interatrial septum that can present 
with atrial fibrillation or mimic infective 
endocarditis. On auscultation, you will 
often hear a tumor “Plop” or see a tumor 
on echocardiography. Patients may 
develop systemic embolization from 
breakoff of tumor, leading to stroke. 
Resection of the tumor is the only 
treatment.
■ Peripheral  pulses:
■ Increased:  Compensated aortic regurgitation (bounding pulses); coarc-
tation (greater in arms than in legs); patent ductus arteriosus.
■ Decreased:  Peripheral arterial disease; late-stage heart failure.
■ Collapsing  (“waterhammer”): Aortic incompetence; AV malforma-
tions; patent ductus arteriosus; thyrotoxicosis, severe anemia.
■ Pulsus paradoxus  (↓ systolic BP > 10 mm Hg with inspiration): Cardiac 
tamponade; pericardial constriction; also seen in obstructive lung diseases 
(eg, severe asthma), tension pneumothorax, and foreign body in airway.
■ Pulsus alternans  (alternating weak and strong pulses): Cardiomyopa-
thy; impaired left ventricular systolic function (LVF). Poor prognosis.
■ Pulsus parvus et tardus  (weak and delayed pulse): Aortic stenosis.
■ Jerky:  hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM).
■ Pulsus bisferiens  (bifid pulse/“twice beating”): Aortic regurgitation; 
combined aortic stenosis and aortic regurgitation, HOCM.
This is Wolff-Parkinson-White 
syndrome (WPW). Advise against 
vigorous physical activity, use 
procainamide for arrhythmias, 
and refer for an electrophysiology 
study. Calcium channel blockers are 
contraindicated.
FIGURE 2.1-7.  Heart murmurs. Visual representations of common heart murmurs are 
shown in relation to S1 and S2. MC, midsystolic click; OS, opening snap. (Reproduced with permis-
sion from USMLE-Rx.com.)
Aortic stenosis
S1 S2
Mitral/tricuspid regurgitation 
S1 S2
Mitral valve prolapse
S1 MC S2
Ventricular septal defect
S1 S2
Aortic regurgitation
S1 S2
Mitral stenosis
S1 S2 OS
Patent ductus arteriosus
S1 S2
22 HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN CARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   22 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 40 ---
Arrhythmias
BRADYARRHYTHMIAS AND CONDUCTION ABNORMALITIES
Table 2.1-3 outlines the etiologies, clinical presentation, and treatment of 
common bradyarrhythmias and conduction abnormalities.
 MNEMONIC
Management options for atrial 
fibrillation—
ABCD
Anticoagulate
𝛃-blockers to control rate
Cardiovert/Calcium channel blockers
Digoxin (in refractory cases)
 KEY FACT
An atrial myxoma is a benign tumor 
of the heart, commonly found 
within the left and right atria on the 
interatrial septum that can present 
with atrial fibrillation or mimic infective 
endocarditis. On auscultation, you will 
often hear a tumor “Plop” or see a tumor 
on echocardiography. Patients may 
develop systemic embolization from 
breakoff of tumor, leading to stroke. 
Resection of the tumor is the only 
treatment.
type etIoLogy sIgns/syMptoMs ecg FIndIngs treatMent
Sinus 
bradycardia
Normal response to cardio-
vascular conditioning
Can also result from sinus 
node dysfunction, 
β-blocker or CCB excess; 
therefore, it is important 
to review medications
May be asymptomatic, but 
may also present with light-
headedness, syncope, chest 
pain, or hypotension
Sinus rhythm
Ventricular rate < 60 bpm
None if asymptomatic and 
rate > 40 bpm; atropine 
may be used to ↑ heart 
rate
Pacemaker implant is the 
definitive treatment in 
severe cases
First-degree 
AV block
Can occur in normal indi-
viduals; associated with 
↑ vagal tone, β-blocker 
or CCB use
Asymptomatic
PR interval > 200 msec None necessary
Second-degree 
AV block 
(Mobitz 
type I/
Wenckebach)
Drug effects (digoxin, 
β-blockers, CCBs) or 
↑ vagal tone; right 
coronary ischemia or 
infarction
Usually asymptomatic
Progressive PR lengthening 
until a dropped beat 
occurs; the PR interval 
then resets
None if asymptomatic
Stop the offending drug
Atropine as clinically 
indicated
Second-degree 
AV block 
(Mobitz 
type II)
Results from fibrotic 
disease of the conduc-
tion system or from 
acute, subacute, or 
prior MI
Occasionally syncope; fre-
quent progression to 
third-degree AV block
Unexpected dropped 
beat(s) without a change 
in PR interval
Pacemaker placement 
(even if asymptomatic)
Third-degree 
AV block 
(complete)
No electrical communica-
tion between the atria 
and ventricles
Syncope, dizziness, acute 
heart failure, hypotension, 
cannon A waves
No relationship between 
P waves and QRS 
complexes
Pacemaker placement
Sick sinus 
syndrome/
tachycardia-
bradycardia 
syndrome
Heterogeneous disorder 
that leads to intermit-
tent supraventricular 
tachyarrhythmias and 
bradyarrhythmias
2° to tachycardia or 
bradycardia; AF and throm-
boembolism may occur 
→ syncope, palpitations, 
dyspnea, chest pain, TIA, 
and/or stroke
Most common indica-
tion for pacemaker 
placement
Anticoagulate in atrial 
fibrillation/flutter to 
prevent systemic emboli
TABLE 2.1-3.  Br adyarrhythmias and Conduction Abnormalities
23HIGH-YIELD FACTS INCARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   23 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 41 ---
TACHYARRHYTHMIAS
Tables 2.1-4 and 2.1-5 outline the etiologies, clinical presentation, and treat-
ment of common supraventricular and ventricular tachyarrhythmias.
 KEY FACT
Patients with persistent tachyarrhythmia 
(narrow- or wide-complex) causing 
hemodynamic instability should be 
managed with immediate synchronized 
cardioversion.
 KEY FACT
Use the CHA2DS2-VASc scoring 
system to estimate stroke risk in atrial 
fibrillation, and anticoagulate with 
NOAC (eg, dabigatran, rivaroxaban, 
apixaban, and edoxaban) or warfarin 
(used with metal valves or mitral 
stenosis) for a score of 2 or more:
■ CHF (1 point).
■ HTN (1 point).
■ Age ≥ 75 (2 points).
■ Diabetes (1 point).
■ Stroke or TIA history (2 points).
■ Vascular disease (1 point).
■ Age 65–74 (1 point).
■ Sex category (female) (1 point).
(continues)
type etIoLogy sIgns/syMptoMs ecg FIndIngs treatMent
atrIaL
Sinus 
tachycardia
Normal physiologic 
response to fear, 
pain, and exercise
Can also be 2° to 
hyperthyroidism, 
volume contraction, 
infection, or PE
Palpitations, shortness of breath
 
Sinus rhythm
Ventricular rate 
> 100 bpm
Treat the underlying cause
Atrial fibrilla-
tion (AF)
Acute AF—PIRATES:
Pulmonary disease
Ischemia
Rheumatic heart 
disease
Anemia/Atrial 
myxoma
Thyrotoxicosis
Ethanol
Sepsis
Chronic AF—HTN, CHF
Most often caused by 
ectopic foci within 
the pulmonary veins
Often asymptomatic and incidental 
but can present with shortness 
of breath, chest pain, dizziness, 
fatigue, or palpitations. May present 
with congestive heart failure, 
cardiogenic shock, or devastating 
cerebrovascular accident
Physical exam reveals an irregular 
pulse
No discernible P waves, 
with variable and irreg-
ular QRS response
For chronic AF, initial 
therapy:
Rate control with 
β-blockers, CCBs, or 
digoxin
Anticoagulate with 
warfarin or novel 
oral anticoagulant 
(NOAC) for patients 
with CHA
2DS2-VASc 
score ≥ 2
For unstable AF, or new-
onset AF (of < 2 days) 
cardiovert
If > 2 days or unclear 
duration, must get TEE 
to rule out atrial clot
Atrial flutter Circular movement 
of electrical activity 
around the atrium 
at a rate of approxi-
mately 300 times 
per minute
Usually asymptomatic but can present 
with palpitations, syncope, and 
lightheadedness
Regular rhythm; “saw-
tooth” appearance of 
P waves can be seen
The atrial rate is usually 
240–320 bpm, and 
the ventricular rate is 
∼150 bpm
Anticoagulation, rate 
control, and cardiover-
sion guidelines as in AF 
above
Multifocal 
atrial 
tachycardia
Multiple atrial pace-
makers or reentrant 
pathways; associ-
ated with COPD, 
hypoxemia
May be asymptomatic. At least three 
different P-wave morphologies
Three or more unique 
P-wave morphologies; 
rate > 100 bpm
Treat as AF but avoid 
β-blockers because of 
chronic lung disease (if 
present)
TABLE 2.1-4.  Supr aventricular Tachyarrhythmias
24 HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN CARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   24 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 42 ---
Congestive Heart Failure
A clinical syndrome caused by inability of the heart to pump enough blood 
to maintain fluid and metabolic homeostasis. Risk factors include the 
following:
■ Coronary heart disease.
■ Hypertension.
■ Cardiomyopathy.
■ Valvular heart disease.
■ Diabetes.
■ COPD (cor pulmonale).
The American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology guidelines 
classify heart failure according to clinical syndromes, but alternative classifica
-
tion systems, including that of the New York Heart Association (NYHA), 
include functional severity, left-sided vs right-sided failure, and systolic vs 
nonsystolic failure (see Tables 2.1-6–2.1-8).
TACHYARRHYTHMIAS
Tables 2.1-4 and 2.1-5 outline the etiologies, clinical presentation, and treat-
ment of common supraventricular and ventricular tachyarrhythmias.
 KEY FACT
Patients with persistent tachyarrhythmia 
(narrow- or wide-complex) causing 
hemodynamic instability should be 
managed with immediate synchronized 
cardioversion.
 KEY FACT
Use the CHA2DS2-VASc scoring 
system to estimate stroke risk in atrial 
fibrillation, and anticoagulate with 
NOAC (eg, dabigatran, rivaroxaban, 
apixaban, and edoxaban) or warfarin 
(used with metal valves or mitral 
stenosis) for a score of 2 or more:
■ C HF (1 point).
■ H TN (1 point).
■ A ge ≥ 75 (2 points).
■ D iabetes (1 point).
■ S troke or TIA history (2 points).
■ V ascular disease (1 point).
■ A ge 65–74 (1 point).
■ S ex category (female) (1 point).
type etIoLogy sIgns/syMptoMs ecg FIndIngs treatMent
atrIoVentrIcuLar JunctIon
Atrioventric-
ular nodal 
reentry 
tachycardia 
(AVNRT)
A reentry circuit in the 
AV node depolar-
izes the atrium and 
ventricle nearly 
simultaneously
Palpitations, shortness of breath, 
angina, syncope, lightheadedness
Rate 150–250 bpm; P 
wave is often buried in 
QRS or shortly after
Cardiovert if hemodynami-
cally unstable. Vagal 
maneuvers (eg, carotid 
massage, Valsalva, ice 
immersion (dive reflex). 
Adenosine if vagal 
maneuver fails
Atrioven-
tricular 
reentrant 
tachycardia 
(AVRT )
An ectopic connection 
between the atrium 
and ventricle that 
causes a reentry 
circuit
Seen in WPW
Palpitations, shortness of breath, 
angina, syncope, lightheadedness
A retrograde P wave 
is often seen after a 
normal QRS
A reexcitation delta wave 
is characteristically 
seen in WPW
Except for WPW, same as 
that for AVNRT
WPW listed separately 
below
Wolff-
Parkinson-
White 
(WPW) 
syndrome
Abnormal fast acces-
sory conduction 
pathway from atria 
to ventricle (Bundle 
of Kent)
Palpitations, dyspnea, dizziness, and 
rarely cardiac death
Characteristic delta wave 
with widened QRS 
complex and short-
ened PR interval (see 
Figure 2.1-8)
Observation for 
asymptomatics
Acute therapy is procain-
amide or amiodarone
SVT gets worse after CCBs 
or digoxin (dangerous in 
WPW). Radiofrequency 
catheter ablation is 
curative
Paroxysmal 
atrial 
tachycardia
Rapid ectopic pace-
maker in the atrium 
(not sinus node)
Palpitations, shortness of breath, 
angina, syncope, lightheadedness
Rate > 100 bpm; P wave 
with an unusual axis 
before each normal 
QRS
Adenosine can be used 
to unmask underlying 
atrial activity by slowing 
down the rate
TABLE 2.1-4.  Supraventricular Tachyarrhythmias (continued)
25HIGH-YIELD FACTS INCARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   25 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 43 ---
type etIoLogy sIgns/syMptoMs ecg FIndIngs treatMent
Premature 
ventricular 
contraction 
(PVC)
Ectopic beats arise 
from ventricular 
foci. Associated with 
hypoxia, fibrosis, ↓ LV 
function, electrolyte 
abnormalities, and 
hyperthyroidism
Usually asymptomatic but may lead to 
palpitations
Early, wide QRS not 
preceded by a P 
wave
PVCs are usually 
followed by a 
compensatory 
pause
Treat the underlying 
cause
If symptomatic, give 
β-blockers or, 
occasionally, other 
antiarrhythmics
Ventricular 
tachycardia 
(VT)
Can be associated with 
CAD, MI, and struc-
tural heart disease
Nonsustained VT (lasts < 30 seconds) is 
often asymptomatic; sustained VT (lasts 
> 30 seconds) can lead to palpitations, hypo-
tension, angina, and syncope
Can progress to VF and death
Three or more con-
secutive PVCs; 
wide QRS com-
plexes in a regular 
rapid rhythm; may 
see AV dissociation
Cardioversion if 
unstable. Antiar-
rhythmics (eg, 
amiodarone, 
lidocaine, procain-
amide) if stable
Ventricular 
fibrillation 
(VF)
Associated with CAD 
and structural heart 
disease
Also associated with 
cardiac arrest 
(together with 
asystole)
Syncope, absence of BP , no pulse
Totally erratic wide-
complex tracing
Immediate electrical 
defibrillation and 
ACLS protocol
Torsades de 
pointes
Associated with long 
QT syndrome, proar-
rhythmic response 
to medications, 
hypokalemia, con-
genital deafness, 
and alcoholism
Can present with sudden cardiac death; typically 
associated with palpitations, dizziness, and 
syncope
Polymorphous QRS; 
VT with rates 
between 150 and 
250 bpm
Give magnesium 
initially and car-
diovert if unstable
Correct hypoka-
lemia; withdraw 
offending drugs
TABLE 2.1-5.  V entricular Tachyarrhythmias
cLass descrIptIon
I No limitation of activity; no symptoms (palpitations, dyspnea, and fatigue) with 
normal activity
II Slight limitation of activity. Comfortable at rest or with mild exertion
III Marked limitation of activity; comfortable only at rest
IV Any physical activity brings on discomfort; symptoms (palpitations, dyspnea, and 
fatigue) present at rest
TABLE 2.1-6.  N YHA Functional Classification of CHF
Delta wave
PR interval
Normal PR interval
Shortened PR interval
FIGURE 2.1-8.  Ventricular tachyar-
rhythmias. Characteristic delta wave 
with widened QRS complex and short-
ened PR interval in WPW. (Reproduced with 
permission from USMLE-Rx.com.)
26 HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN CARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   26 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 44 ---
SYSTOLIC DYSFUNCTION/HEART FAILURE WITH REDUCED EJECTION FRACTION
A ↓ EF (< 40%) and ↑ left ventricular end-diastolic volumes. It is caused by 
inadequate left ventricular contractility or ↑ afterload. The heart compensates 
for ↓ EF and ↑ preload through hypertrophy and ventricular dilation (Frank-
Starling law), but the compensation ultimately fails, leading to ↑ myocardial 
work and worsening systolic function.
History/PE
■ Exertional dyspnea that progresses to orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal 
dyspnea (PND), and finally dyspnea at rest.
■ Chronic cough, fatigue, and peripheral edema may be reported.
■ Exam: parasternal lift, an elevated and sustained left ventricular impulse, 
an S3/S4 gallop, JVD, rales on lung exam, and peripheral edema.
■ Look for signs to distinguish left- from right-sided failure (see Table 2.1-8).
Diagnosis
■ CHF is a clinical syndrome whose diagnosis is based on signs and 
symptoms.
■ Diagnostic studies that may support diagnosis include the following:
■ Best initial test:  Echocardiogram (transthoracic echocardiogram). 
↓ EF and ventricular dilation may help pinpoint underlying cause (ie, 
AF, old MI, or LVH).
■ ECG:  May show MI, heart block, arrhythmia.
 KEY FACT
The most common cause of right-sided 
heart failure is left-sided heart failure.
 KEY FACT
Hyponatremia parallels severity of heart 
failure and is an independent predictor 
of mortality in these patients.
 MNEMONIC
CXR findings in CHF diagnosis—
ABCDE
Alveolar edema (“Bat’s wings”)
Kerley B lines (interstitial edema)
Cardiomegaly
Dilated prominent upper lobe vessels
Effusion (pleural)
VarIabLe
systoLIc dysFunctIon/Heart FaILure wItH 
reduced eJectIon FractIon (HFreF)
dIastoLIc dysFunctIon/Heart FaILure wItH preserVed eJectIon 
FractIon (HFpeF)
Patient age Often < 65 years of age Often > 65 years of age
Comorbidities Dilated cardiomyopathy, valvular heart disease, 
myocardial infarction
Restrictive or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; renal disease or HTN
Physical exam Displaced PMI, S3 gallop (“KEN”-tuc-ky) Sustained PMI, S4 gallop (“Tenn”-es-SEE)
CXR Pulmonary congestion, cardiomegaly Pulmonary congestion
ECG/echocardiography Q waves, ↓ EF (< 40%), dilation of the heart LVH, normal/preserved EF (> 55%), abnormal LV diastolic indices
TABLE 2.1-7.  C omparison of Systolic and Diastolic Dysfunction
LeFt-sIded cHF syMptoMs rIgHt-sIded cHF syMptoMs
Dyspnea predominates
Left-sided S3/S4 gallop
Bilateral basilar rales
Pleural effusions
Pulmonary edema
Orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea
Fluid retention predominates
Right-sided S3/S4 gallop
JVD
Hepatojugular reflux
Peripheral edema
Hepatomegaly, ascites
TABLE 2.1-8.  Left-Sided vs Right-Sided Heart Failure
27HIGH-YIELD FACTS INCARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   27 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 45 ---
■ CXR:  May show cardiomegaly, cephalization of pulmonary vessels, 
pleural effusions, vascular congestion, pulmonary edema, and promi-
nent hila (see Figure 2.1-9).
■ Lab abnormalities:  Brain natriuretic peptide > 500 pg/mL, ↓ CBC 
(anemia), ↑ creatinine (sometimes), ↓ sodium in later stages, ↑ or ↓ 
TSH/T4 levels.
trEatmEnt
Acute:
■ Pharmacologic therapy  (see Table 2.1-9):
■ Loop diuretics (most commonly) for aggressive diuresis.
■ ACEIs or ARB in combination with loop diuretics.
■ β -blockers should be avoided during decompensated CHF but should 
be restarted once patient is euvolemic.
■ Correct underlying causes such as arrhythmias, myocardial ischemia, and 
drugs (eg, CCBs, antiarrhythmics, NSAIDs, alcohol, anemia, thyroid and 
valvular disease, high-output states).
 KEY FACT
Atrial tachycardia with AV block occurs 
2° to digoxin toxicity.
 MNEMONIC
Acute CHF management—
LMNOP
Lasix (furosemide)
Morphine
Nitrates
Oxygen
Position (sit upright)
FIGURE 2.1-9.  Chest x-ray (CXR) with evidence of congestive heart failure. Frontal CXR 
demonstrates marked cardiomegaly, cephalization of vessels (arrow), interstitial edema (circle), 
and left-sided pleural effusion that raise concern for CHF. (Reproduced with permission from Tintinalli JE 
et al. Tintinalli’s Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide, 7th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2011.)
cLass exaMpLes sIde eFFects
Loop diuretics Furosemide, ethacrynic acid, 
bumetanide, torsemide
Ototoxicity, hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, hyperuricemia, dehydration, gout
Thiazide diuretics Hydrochlorothiazide, chloro-
thiazide, chlorthalidone
Hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis, hyponatremia, and hyperGLUC (hyperGlycemia, 
hyperLipidemia, hyperUricemia, hyperCalcemia)
K+-sparing agents Spironolactone, eplerenone, 
triamterene, amiloride
Hyperkalemia, gynecomastia, sexual dysfunction. Eplerenone does not have antian-
drogenic effects that lead to gynecomastia
Carbonic anhydrase 
inhibitors
Acetazolamide Hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis, neuropathy, NH
3 toxicity, sulfa allergy
Osmotic agents Mannitol Pulmonary edema, dehydration. Contraindicated in anuria and CHF
TABLE 2.1-9.  T ypes of Diuretics
28 HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN CARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   28 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 46 ---
■ Treat acute pulmonary congestion with LMNOP (see Acute CHF man -
agement mnemonic).
■ Acute decompensated heart failure:  Inotropic agents (eg, dobutamine) 
reduce left ventricular end-systolic volume for symptomatic improvement.
Chronic:
■ Lifestyle:  Control comorbid conditions, and limit dietary sodium and 
fluid intake.
■ Pharmacologic  therapy:
■ β-blockers and ACEIs/ARBs:  Help prevent remodeling of the heart and 
↓ mortality for NYHA class II–IV patients. Avoid CCBs (can worsen 
edema).
■ Low-dose spironolactone:  Shown to ↓ mortality risk in patients with 
NYHA class III–IV heart failure.
■ Diuretics  (most commonly loop diuretics): Prevent volume overload.
■ Digoxin:  Symptomatic control of dyspnea and ↓  frequency of 
hospitalizations.
■ Daily ASA and a statin are recommended if the underlying cause is a 
prior MI.
■ Advanced pharmacologic  therapy:
■ Sacubitril/valsartan:  angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitor (ARNI) 
is a new drug class used in patients who continue to be dyspneic 
despite using the initial pharmacologic regimen. Provides mortality 
benefit for systolic dysfunction.
■ Ivabradine:  Reduces heart rate through SA nodal inhibition of the 
“funny channels.” Indicated in patients with systolic dysfunction if 
pulse is > 70 bpm or β-blockers are contraindicated.
Advanced treatments:
■ Implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD) in patients with an EF < 35%. 
Shown to ↓ mortality risk.
■ Biventricular pacemaker in patient with an EF < 35%, dilated cardiomy-
opathy, and widened QRS complex with persistent symptoms.
■ Left ventricular assist device (LVAD) or cardiac transplantation may be 
necessary in patients who are unresponsive to maximal medical therapy 
and biventricular pacemaker failure
.
NONSYSTOLIC DYSFUNCTION/HEART FAILURE   
WITH PRESERVED EJECTION FRACTION
Defined by ↓ ventricular compliance with normal systolic function. The ven-
tricle has either impaired active relaxation (2° to hypertension, ischemia, 
aging, and/or hypertrophy) or impaired passive filling (scarring from prior  
MI; restrictive cardiomyopathy). Left ventricular end-diastolic pressure ↑, car-
diac output remains essentially normal, and EF is normal or ↑.
History/PE
Associated with stable and unstable angina, shortness of breath, dyspnea on 
exertion, arrhythmias, MI, heart failure, and sudden death.
trEatmEnt
■ Best initial treatment:  Diuretics (see Table 2.1-9).
■ Maintain rate and BP control via β -blockers (first-line), ACEIs, ARBs, or 
CCBs.
■ Digoxin and spironolactone are not beneficial in these patients.
 KEY FACT
ACEIs/ARBs, ARNI, β-blockers, 
spironolactone or eplerenone, 
hydralazine/nitrates, and implantable 
defibrillator have mortality benefit 
in systolic dysfunction. Diuretics and 
digoxin (as well as other positive 
inotropic agents) are for symptomatic 
relief only and confer no mortality 
benefit. CCBs may ↑ mortality.
 KEY FACT
Loops lose calcium; thiazides take 
it in. Both cause hypokalemia and 
hyperuricemia.
A man was admitted for a CHF 
exacerbation with low EF. The patient 
is now ready for discharge, and his 
medications include furosemide 
and metoprolol. Assuming no 
contraindications, what medication 
would be appropriate to add to his 
treatment regimen?
1
A woman with HTN and prior MI has 
an exam notable for a displaced PMI, 
an S3, a nonelevated JVP , and bibasilar 
rales. What is the next best step in 
diagnosis?
2
29HIGH-YIELD FACTS INCARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   29 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 47 ---
Cardiomyopathy
Myocardial disease; categorized as dilated, hypertrophic, or restrictive (see 
Table 2.1-10 and Figure 2.1-10).
DILATED CARDIOMYOPATHY
The most common cardiomyopathy. Left ventricular dilation and ↓ EF must 
be present for diagnosis. Most cases are idiopathic, but known 2° causes 
include alcohol, postviral myocarditis, postpartum status, drugs (doxorubicin, 
AZT, cocaine), radiation, endocrinopathies (thyrotoxicosis, acromegaly, 
pheochromocytoma), infection (coxsackievirus, HIV, Chagas disease, para-
sites), genetic factors, and nutritional disorders (wet beriberi). The most 
common causes of 2° dilated cardiomyopathy are ischemia and long-
standing hypertension.
History/PE
■ Often presents with gradual development of CHF symptoms such as  
dyspnea on exertion, and diffuse edema of the ankles, feet, legs, and 
abdomen.
■ Exam often reveals displacement of the left ventricular impulse, JVD, 
rales, an S3/S4 gallop, or mitral/tricuspid regurgitation.
Diagnosis
■ Echocardiography is diagnostic.
■ CXR shows an enlarged, “balloon-like” heart and pulmonary congestion.
trEatmEnt
■ Address the underlying etiology (eg, alcohol use, endocrine disorders, 
infection).
■ Treat CHF as noted in above section with lifestyle changes, and pharma -
cologic and advanced treatments.
 KEY FACT
An S3 gallop signifies rapid ventricular 
filling in the setting of fluid overload 
and is associated with dilated 
cardiomyopathy. A S3 gallop sounds 
similar to the word “KEN-tuc-ky.”
 KEY FACT
An S4 gallop signifies a stiff, 
noncompliant ventricle and ↑ “atrial 
kick,” and may be associated with 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A S4 
gallop sounds similar to the word 
“Tenn-es-SEE.”
VarIabLe
type
dILated HypertropHIc restrIctIVe
Major abnormality Impaired contractility Impaired relaxation Impaired elasticity
Left ventricular cavity 
size (end diastole)
↑↑ ↓ ↓
Left ventricular cavity 
size (end systole)
↑↑ ↓↓ ↓
EF ↓↓ ↑ (or normal) Normal
Wall thickness Usually ↓ ↑↑ Usually ↑
TABLE 2.1-10.  D ifferential Diagnosis of Cardiomyopathies
Add an angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitor (ACEI) to this 
patient’s current regimen. ACEIs have 
been shown to have a ⊕ mortality 
benefit when used with β-blockers in 
NYHA class II–IV heart failure patients.
1
This patient has evidence of dilated 
cardiomyopathy. An echocardiogram 
would be the next best diagnostic 
step.
2
30 HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN CARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   30 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 48 ---
HYPERTROPHIC CARDIOMYOPATHY
Impaired left ventricular relaxation and filling (diastolic dysfunction) due to 
thickened ventricular walls secondary to stressors on the myocardium, such 
as HTN (most common cause) and aortic stenosis. Hypertrophy may  
also involve the interventricular septum, leading to left ventricular outflow 
tract obstruction and impaired ejection of blood due to asymmetric septal 
hypertrophy. The congenital form, hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyo
-
pathy (HOCM), is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait in 50% of
 
HOCM patients and is the most common cause of sudden death in young, 
healthy athletes in the United States.
History/PE
■ Patients are often asymptomatic but may also present with syncope, light -
headedness, dyspnea, palpitations, angina, or sudden cardiac death.
■ Key finding is a harsh systolic ejection crescendo-decrescendo murmur in 
the lower left sternal edge that 
↑ with ↓ preload (eg, Valsalva maneuver, 
standing) and ↓ with ↑ preload (eg, passive leg raise).
■ Symptoms worsen with exercise, diuretics, dehydration, ACEIs/ARBs, 
digoxin, and hydralazine.
 KEY FACT
HOCM is the most common cause 
of sudden death in young, healthy 
athletes in the United States.
FIGURE 2.1-10.  Cardiomyopathies. Echocardiogram 
four-chamber views of (A) a normal heart, (B) dilated 
cardiomyopathy, and (C) hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. 
(Reproduced with permission from Fuster V et al. Hurst’s The Heart, 12th ed. 
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2008.)
B
A
C
31HIGH-YIELD FACTS INCARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   31 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 49 ---
■ Exam also often reveals a sustained apical impulse, an S4 gallop, para-
doxical S2, and an abnormal bifid or bisferiens pulse (sudden quick 
rise followed by a slower longer rise due to LV outflow tract 
obstruction).
Diagnosis
■ Best initial test:  Echocardiography is diagnostic and shows an asymmetri-
cally hypertrophied interventricular septum and dynamic obstruction of 
blood flow (due to systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve against 
hypertrophied septum).
■ ECG may be normal or show signs of LVH and nonspecific ST- and 
T-wave 
changes. Septal Q waves are common in HOCM (inferior and lat-
eral leads).
■ CXR may reveal left atrial enlargement (LAE) 2° to mitral regurgitation.
trEatmEnt
■ Best initial treatment: β-blockers are the best initial therapy for symp-
tomatic relief in both HCM and HOCM; non-dihydropyridine CCBs 
(negative inotropic effect) and ventricular pacemakers are second-line 
agents.
■ Digoxin and spironolactone are contraindicated. Diuretics may help in 
HCM but are contraindicated in HOCM.
■ Implantable defibrillators should be used in symptomatic HOCM 
patients.
■ Patients should avoid intense athletic competition and training.
■ Surgical options for HOCM with persistent symptoms include partial exci -
sion or alcohol ablation of the myocardial septum.
■ Surgical septal myomectomy is reserved for patients when medical and 
catheter procedures fail.
RESTRICTIVE CARDIOMYOPATHY
Decreased elasticity of myocardium leading to impaired diastolic filling with-
out significant systolic dysfunction (a normal or near-normal EF). It is caused 
by infiltrative disease (eg, amyloidosis, sarcoidosis, hemochromatosis), sclero-
derma, Loeffler eosinophilic endocarditis, endomyocardial fibrosis, or by scar-
ring and fibrosis (2° to radiation).
History/PE
Signs and symptoms of right-sided heart failure (JVD, peripheral edema, asci-
tes, hepatomegaly) often predominate over left-sided failure, but dyspnea is 
the most common complaint.
Diagnosis
■ Echocardiography is key for diagnosis, with rapid early filling and a near-
normal or elevated EF. CXR, MRI, and cardiac catheterization are help-
ful for characterization (eg, sarcoid, amyloidosis).
■ Cardiac biopsy may reveal fibrosis or evidence of infiltration.
■ ECG frequently shows LBBB; low voltages are seen in amyloidosis.
trEatmEnt
Treat the underlying cause. Therapeutic options are limited and are generally 
palliative only. Medical treatment includes cautious use of diuretics for fluid 
overload and vasodilators to ↓ filling pressure.
32 HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN CARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   32 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 50 ---
Coronary Artery Disease
Also known as ischemic heart disease (IHD) or atherosclerotic heart disease. 
Clinical manifestations include stable and unstable angina, shortness of 
breath, dyspnea on exertion, arrhythmias, MI, heart failure, and sudden 
death.
Risk factors include the following:
■ Diabetes mellitus (DM).
■ Family history of premature CAD (men age < 55 years, women age 
< 65 years).
■ Smoking.
■ Hyperlipidemia.
■ Abdominal obesity.
■ HTN.
■ Age (men age > 45 years, women age > 55 years).
■ Male gender.
■ CAD risk equivalents include DM, symptomatic carotid artery disease, 
peripheral arterial disease, and abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA)
.
ANGINA PECTORIS
Substernal chest pain 2° to myocardial ischemia (O 2 supply-and-demand mis-
match). Mostly caused by atheroma. Less frequently caused by anemia, aortic 
stenosis, tachyarrhythmias, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and small vessel 
disease.
History/PE
■ The classic triad consists of substernal chest pain that is usually precipi -
tated by stress or exertion and is relieved by rest or nitrates (stable angina).
■ The duration of stable angina is usually from 2–10 minutes (acute coro -
nary syndrome is normally 10–30 minutes in duration).
■ Pain can radiate to the neck or arm and may be associated with shortness of 
breath, nausea/vomiting, diaphoresis, dizziness, or lightheadedness.
■ Pain is usually described as dull, squeezing, tightness, or pressure-like.
■ Ischemic pain is not tender, positional, or pleuritic .
Diagnosis
■ Best initial test:  ECG for any type of chest pain. Usually normal in 
angina pectoris, but may show ST-depression, flat or inverted T waves, or 
signs of past MI.
■ Cardiac enzymes (CK-MB/troponin): Normal. May be required to be 
done in emergency setting after an ECG.
■ Stress testing:  ST-segment or wall-motion changes (using echo) with exer-
cise or pharmacologic stress (dobutamine echo or dipyridamole thallium) 
are diagnostic of CAD. ECG stress test is not helpful without imaging for 
patients with abnormal baseline ECGs. (Note: Do not perform stress tests 
on asymptomatic patients with low pretest probability of disease.) Hold 
β-blockers, CCBs, and nitrates for 48 hours prior to stress test. Pharmaco-
logic stress testing works due to coronary steal (diseased vessels are already 
maximally dilated while nondiseased vessels dilate in response to drugs, 
such as dipyridamole, leading to detectable ischemia).
■ Coronary angiography or CT coronary angiogram: Coronary angiogra-
phy, or a less invasive diagnostic test, CT coronary angiogram (availability 
 KEY FACT
Major risk factors for CAD include 
advanced age, male gender, ↑ LDL, 
↓ HDL, HTN, a family history, and 
smoking. MI in menstruating women 
is rare.
 KEY FACT
Pain that is sharp or stabbing, or that 
changes with position, breathing, or 
touch, is less likely to be ischemic.
33HIGH-YIELD FACTS INCARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   33 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 51 ---
varies among centers), may be used as a last resort if ECG or stress testing 
is equivocal.
■ Rule out pulmonary, GI, or other cardiac causes of chest pain.
noncarDiac DiffErEntial Diagnosis
■ GERD:  History described as hoarseness, bad taste, and cough; relief of 
symptoms with proton pump inhibitors confirms diagnosis.
■ Musculoskeletal/costochondritis:  Pain is described as tender to palpation 
and movement.
■ Pneumonia/pleuritis:  Pain is described as worsening with breathing 
(pleuritic) and is often accompanied by fever and productive cough.
■ Anxiety:  Patients may have history of panic disorder or anxiety attacks.
trEatmEnt
■ Chronic stable angina:  ASA, β-blockers, and nitroglycerin.
■ Nitroglycerin relieves pain due to ↓ in left ventricular end-diastolic 
pressure and wall stress.
■ Initiate risk-factor reduction (eg, smoking, cholesterol, HTN) through the 
initiation 
of ACEIs/ARBs, lipid-lowering therapies (ie, statins), and smok-
ing cessation. Hormone replacement therapy is not protective in post-
menopausal women.
PRINZMETAL (VARIANT) ANGINA
■ Mimics angina pectoris but is caused by vasospasm of coronary vessels. It 
classically affects young women at rest (rather than during activity) in the 
early 
morning and is associated with ST-segment elevation. It is also asso-
ciated with illicit drug use, especially cocaine.
■ Patients usually do not have the standard risk factors for atherosclerosis.
■ Tx:  CCBs with or without long-acting nitrates. Aspirin is avoided as it can 
aggravate the ischemic attacks. β-blockers are contraindicated as they can 
↑ vasospasm.
CAROTID ARTERY STENOSIS
Atherosclerotic lesion of either (or both) carotid arteries. Accounts for 20% of 
transient ischemic attacks and embolic strokes.
History/PE
■ Often asymptomatic.
■ Symptomatic disease is characterized by sudden-onset focal neurologic 
defect in the past six months (ie, TIA or stroke).
■ PE may reveal carotid artery bruit.
■ Risk factors: Advanced age, smoking, HTN, hyperlipidemia, diabetes, 
obesity, and family history of CAD and/or carotid artery disease.
Diagnosis
Duplex ultrasonography can determine percent occlusion.
trEatmEnt
■ Definitive treatment:  Carotid endarterectomy (CEA).
■ Men with ≥ 60% (≥ 50% if symptomatic) stenosis or women with 
≥ 70% stenosis benefit from CEA.
■ Smaller lesions are monitored with serial duplex ultrasonography.
 KEY FACT
Common causes of chest pain 
include GERD, angina, esophageal 
pain, musculoskeletal disorders 
(costochondritis, trauma), and 
pneumonia.
 KEY FACT
Only ASA and β-blockers have been 
shown to have a mortality benefit in 
the treatment of angina.
34 HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN CARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   34 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 52 ---
Acute Coronary Syndromes
A spectrum of clinical syndromes caused by plaque disruption or vasospasm 
that leads to acute myocardial ischemia.
UNSTABLE ANGINA/NON–ST-SEGMENT ELEVATION MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION
Chest pain that is (1) new onset, (2) accelerating (ie, occurs with less exertion, 
lasts longer, or is less responsive to medications), or (3) occurs at rest. Patient his-
tory distinguishes unstable angina from stable angina pectoris. Both stable and 
unstable angina have no elevated cardiac biomarkers. It signals the presence of 
possible impending infarction based on plaque instability. In contrast, NSTEMI 
indicates myocardial necrosis marked by elevations in troponin I and creatine 
kinase–MB isoenzyme (CK-MB) without ST-segment elevations seen on ECG.
Diagnosis
■ Patients should be risk stratified according to the Thrombolysis in Myocar -
dial Infarction (TIMI) study criteria (see Table 2.1-11).
■ ECG:  Unstable angina and NSTEMI are not associated with ST eleva-
tion, but ST changes (eg, ST depression, T-wave inversion, nonspecific 
changes) may be seen on ECG.
■ Cardiac markers (CK-MB /troponin):  Unstable angina is not associated 
with elevated cardiac markers. NSTEMI is associated with elevations in 
cardiac markers.
■ NSTEMI is diagnosed by serial cardiac enzymes and ECG.
trEatmEnt
Best initial treatment:
■ Admit to CCU, and monitor closely.
■ If SaO2 < 90% or breathless, administer O2.
 KEY FACT
Acute coronary syndrome:
■ Unstable ang ina: ECG—no ST 
elevation; cardiac biomarkers ⊝.
■ NSTEMI: EC G—no ST elevation; 
cardiac biomarkers ⊕.
■ STEMI: EC G—ST elevation; cardiac 
biomarkers ⊕.
cHaracterIstIcs poInt
History
Age ≥ 65 years
Three or more CAD risk factors (premature family history, DM, smoking, HTN, 
↑ cholesterol, PAD, abdominal aortic aneurysm)
Known CAD (stenosis > 50%)
ASA use in past 7 days
1
1 
1
1
Presentation
Severe angina (two or more episodes within 24 hours)
ST deviation ≥ 0.5 mm
+ cardiac marker
 
1
1
1
R
isk score—total pointsa (0–7)
aPatients at higher risk (risk score ≥ 3) benefit more from enoxaparin (vs unfractionated heparin), 
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors, and early angiography.
TABLE 2.1-11.  TIMI R isk Score for Unstable Angina/NSTEMI
35HIGH-YIELD FACTS INCARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   35 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 53 ---
■ Analgesia:  IV morphine with IV metoclopramide.
■ Nitrates:  IV, GTN, or sublingual.
■ Antiplatelet therapy:  ASA (↓ mortality in ACS) in combination with a sec-
ond agent (ie, clopidogrel, prasugrel, or ticagrelor), unless contraindicated.
■ Consider β -blockers as hemodynamics allow (if hypertensive/tachycardic/
LV function < 40%).
■ Low-molecular-weight heparin (eg, enoxaparin) to prevent clot formation 
in the coronary arteries.
Interventions:
■ Assess mortality risk (eg, TIMI score, GRACE score).
■ Heparin is recommended for non-ST elevation MI. Thrombolytics are 
only recommended in STEMI if percutaneous coronary intervention 
(PCI) is not available within 2 hours.
■ Patients with chest pain refractory to medical therapy, a TIMI score of 
≥
 3, a troponin elevation, or ST changes > 1 mm should be given GPIIb/
IIIa inhibitors (abciximab, tirofiban, eptifibatide) and scheduled for angi-
ography and possible revascularization within 72 hours (percutaneous cor-
onary intervention [PCI] or coronary artery bypass graft [CABG]).
■ Dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and prasugrel or ticagrelor (also  
P2Y12 inhibitors but superior to clopidogrel) should be considered for up to 
12 months after angioplasty and stenting to prevent restenosis of stenting.
■ Ensure patient is on long-term β-blockers (if depressed LV function), 
ACEIs/ARBs, and statin.
■ Address modifiable risk factors (ie, smoking, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, 
diabetes).
ST-SEGMENT ELEVATION MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION
ST-segment elevations and cardiac enzyme release 2° to prolonged cardiac 
ischemia and necrosis. STEMI is a common medical emergency, and prompt 
treatment is absolutely necessary.
History/PE
■ Presentation:  Acute-onset substernal chest pain (> 10–30 min), com-
monly described as a pressure, tightness, or heaviness that can radiate to 
the left arm, shoulders, neck, or jaw. May present without chest pain 
(“silent” infarct).
■ Associated symptoms:  Diaphoresis, shortness of breath, lightheadedness, 
anxiety, nausea/vomiting, epigastric pain (more common in women), and 
syncope.
■ PE:  May reveal arrhythmias, hypotension (cardiogenic shock), new S4, 
pansystolic murmur, and evidence of new CHF. Clear lung fields are seen 
in right ventricular MI (inferior MI). In a young, otherwise healthy per-
son, consider cocaine use as the etiology.
■ The best predictor of survival is left ventricular EF.
■ Differential diagnosis:  Angina, myocarditis, pericarditis, aortic dissection, 
pulmonary embolism, esophageal reflux/spasm.
Diagnosis
■ ECG:  ST-segment elevations, hyperacute (tall) T waves, or new LBBB 
within hours. ST-segment depressions and dominant R waves in leads V 1–
V2 can also be reciprocal change indicating posterior wall infarct. T-wave 
inversion and pathologic Q waves develop within hours to days.
■ Sequence of ECG changes:  Peaked T waves → ST-segment elevation → 
Q waves →  T-wave inversion →  ST-segment normalization → T-wave 
normalization over several hours to days.
 MNEMONIC
Treatment for MI—
Patient is MOANing Big from MI
Morphine
Oxygen (to maintain saturations)
ASA + Additional second antiplatelet 
agent (NSTEMI)
Nitrates
𝛃-blockers
 KEY FACT
It is important to check for aortic 
dissection clinically prior to 
administering anticoagulants or 
thrombolytics.
36 HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN CARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   36 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 54 ---
■ Cardiac  enzymes:
■ Troponin (T and I) is the most sensitive and specific cardiac marker.
■ CK-MB and the CK-MB/total CK ratio (CK index) are also regularly 
checked.
■ Both troponin and CK-MB can take up to 3–12 hours to rise following 
the onset of chest pain. Troponin peaks at 24–48 hours, and CK-MB 
peaks within 24 hours (see 
Figure 2.1-11).
■ ST-segment  abnormalities:
■ Inferior MI (involving the RCA/PDA): ST-segment elevation in leads 
II, III, and aVF (see Figure 2.1-12). Obtain a right-sided ECG to look 
for ST elevations in the right ventricle.
■ Anterior MI (involving LAD and diagonal branches):  ST-segment 
elevation in leads V1–V4 (see Figure 2.1-13).
 KEY FACT
Women, diabetics, the elderly, and 
post–heart transplant patients may 
have atypical or clinically silent MIs.
Normal
8
Myoglobin
CK-MB
MLC LD1
cTnl
1 23 4 5 6 7
1
2
5
10
50
Multiples of upper limit of normal
Days after MI onset
100
cTnT
FIGURE 2.1-11.  Typical pattern of serum marker elevation after an acute myocardial 
infarction. CK-MB, creatine kinase MB isoenzyme; cTnI, cardiac troponin I; cTnT, cardiac 
troponin T; LD1, lactate dehydrogenase isoenzyme 1; MLC, myosin light chain. (Reproduced with 
permission from USMLE-Rx.com.)
I aVR V1
V4
aVL V2 V5
aVF V3 V6
II
III
FIGURE 2.1-12.  Inferior wall myocardial infarction. In this patient with acute chest pain, 
the ECG demonstrated acute ST-segment elevation in leads II, III, and aVF with reciprocal 
ST-segment depression and T-wave flattening in leads I, aVL, and V4–V6. (Reproduced with permis-
sion from USMLE-Rx.com.)
37HIGH-YIELD FACTS INCARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   37 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 55 ---
■ Lateral MI (involving LCA): ST-segment elevation in leads I, aVL, 
and V5–V6.
■ Posterior MI:  ST-segment depression in leads V 1–V2 (anterior leads) 
can be indicative. Obtain posterior ECG leads V 7–V9 (15-lead) to 
assess for ST-segment elevations.
trEatmEnt
Best initial treatment:
■ First line:  Antiplatelet therapy; ASA (↓ mortality in ACS). Add prasugrel 
or ticagrelor (both superior to clopidogrel), or clopidogrel as second anti-
platelet agent with aspirin only for patients undergoing angioplasty or 
stenting.
■ Analgesia:  IV morphine with IV metoclopramide.
■ Nitrates:  IV, GTN, or sublingual.
■ If SaO2 < 95%, breathless, or in acute LVF, administer O2.
■ Consider β -blockers as hemodynamics allow (if hypertensive/tachycardic/
LV function < 40%).
■ If the patient is in heart failure or in cardiogenic shock, do not give  
β-blockers; instead, give ACEIs provided that the patient is not hypotensive.
■ In inferior wall MI (ie, right ventricular infarction), avoid nitrates and 
diuretics due to risk for severe hypotension (preload dependent).
Interventions:
■ Emergent angiography and PCI should be performed if possible (superior 
to thrombolysis).
■ If PCI cannot be performed < 120 minutes (door-to-balloon time should 
ideally be <  90 minutes), and there are no contraindications to throm-
bolysis, and the patient presents within 3 hours of chest pain onset, 
thrombolysis with tPA, reteplase, or streptokinase should be performed 
instead of PCI.
■ Thrombolysis target time (door-to-needle time) is < 30 minutes and is 
contraindicated if > 24 hours. Thrombolytics can be used up to 12 hours 
from the onset of symptoms (mortality benefit extends to 12 hours).
■ Long-term management (for all patients) includes ASA, ACEIs, β-blockers, 
nitrates, and high-dose statins.
 KEY FACT
Contraindications to thrombolysis:
■ P revious intracranial hemorrhage or 
major GI bleed.
■ R ecent major trauma/surgery/head 
injury.
■ Ischemic str oke within the last 
6 months.
■ S evere hypertension 
(> 180/110 mmHg).
■ K nown bleeding disorder.
I
aVR V1 V4
aVL V2
V5
aVF V3
V6
II
III
FIGURE 2.1-13.  Anterior wall myocardial infarction. This patient presented with acute 
chest pain. The ECG showed acute ST-segment elevation in leads V1–V6 and hyperacute 
T waves. (Reproduced with permission from USMLE-Rx.com.)
38 HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN CARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   38 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 56 ---
■ If PCI was performed, add clopidogrel, prasugrel, or ticagrelor (dual anti -
platelet therapy).
■ Address modifiable risk factors (ie, smoking, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, 
diabetes)
.
comPlications
■ Arrhythmia:  VF and VT are the most common complications and the 
most common causes of sudden death following acute MI. Sinus bradycar-
dia and third-degree (complete) heart block are also very common.
■ Less common complications include reinfarction, left ventricular wall 
rupture, VSD, pericarditis, papillary muscle rupture (with mitral regurgita-
tion), left ventricular aneurysm or pseudoaneurysm, and mural thrombi 
(with subsequent acute limb ischemia, TIA, or stroke).
■ A timeline of common post-MI complications:
■ First day:  Heart failure.
■ 2–4 days:  Arrhythmia, pericarditis.
■ 5–10 days:  Left ventricular wall rupture (acute pericardial tamponade 
causing electrical alternans, pulseless electrical activity, and JVD), pap-
illary muscle rupture (severe mitral regurgitation, pulmonary edema), 
septal rupture (lower left sternal border murmur, increase in O
2 satura-
tion in the right ventricle).
■ Weeks to months:  Ventricular aneurysm (CHF, arrhythmia, persistent 
ST-segment elevation, mitral regurgitation, thrombus formation).
■ Dressler syndrome, an autoimmune process occurring 2–10 weeks post-MI,  
presents with fever, pericarditis, pleural effusion, leukocytosis, and ↑ ESR.
■ Right ventricular infarction:  Caused by the occlusion of the RCA. Pre -
sents with hypotension, JVD, and clear lungs. Treat with high-volume 
fluid replacement (preload dependent), and avoid nitrates and diuretics
.
Dyslipidemia
Total cholesterol level > 200 mg/dL, LDL > 130 mg/dL, triglycerides 
> 150 mg/dL, and HDL < 40 mg/dL, all of which are risk factors for CAD. 
Etiologies include obesity, DM, alcoholism, hypothyroidism, nephrotic syn-
drome, hepatic disease, Cushing syndrome, OCP use, high-dose diuretic use, 
and familial hypercholesterolemia.
History/PE
■ Most patients have no specific signs or symptoms.
■ Patients with extremely high triglyceride or LDL levels may have xanthomata 
(eruptive itchy nodules, orange streaks in palmar creases, or tuberous plaques 
on the elbows and knees); xanthelasma (yellow fatty deposits in the skin 
around the lids just below the eyes); lipemia retinalis (creamy appearance of 
retinal vessels); corneal arcus (deposition of lipid in the corneal stroma).
■ Patients may have a history of familial primary hyperlipidemias .
Diagnosis
■ Fasting lipid profile:  Total cholesterol, LDL, HDL, and triglycerides.
■ Conduct a fasting lipid profile for patients > 35 years of age or in those 
≥ 20 years of age with CAD risk factors, and repeat every 5 years or sooner 
if lipid levels are elevated.
■ Total serum cholesterol > 200 mg/dL on two different occasions is diag-
nostic of hypercholesterolemia.
■ LDL >  130 mg/dL or HDL < 40 mg/dL is diagnostic of dyslipidemia (not 
optimal levels), even if total serum cholesterol is < 200 mg/dL.
■ Individuals with LDL > 190 mg/dL or triglycerides ≥ 500 mg/dL should 
be evaluated for secondary causes of hyperlipidemia.
 KEY FACT
Indications for CABG:
■ L eft main coronary artery disease.
■ T riple-vessel disease with ≥ 70% in 
each vessel.
■ T wo-vessel disease in diabetic 
patient.
■ S ymptomatic patient despite 
maximal medical therapy.
 MNEMONIC
Complication of MI—
DARTH VADER
Death
Arrhythmia
Rupture (ventricular wall, septum, or 
papillary muscle)
Tamponade
Heart failure
Valvular disease
Aneurysm of ventricle
Dressler’s syndrome
Emboli (mural thrombosis)
Recurrence/Reinfarction/Regurgitation 
(mitral)
 KEY FACT
Right ventricular MI is caused by the 
occlusion of the RCA. Nitrates and 
diuretics must be avoided, and the 
condition is treated with IV fluids.
 KEY FACT
Secondary hyperlipidemia causes 
include Cushing syndrome, 
hypothyroidism, nephrotic syndrome, 
or cholestasis.
 KEY FACT
As you cannot calculate the patient’s 
ASCVD risk on the USMLE, focus on 
obvious signs of ↑ risk (smoking, 
diabetes) or ↓ risk (young, healthy) 
when deciding if statin therapy is 
appropriate.
39HIGH-YIELD FACTS INCARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   39 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 57 ---
trEatmEnt
■ Based on risk stratification using one of many cardiovascular risk calculators.
■ The American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association recom -
mendations are listed in Table 2.1-12.
■ High-intensity therapy:  Goal reduction in LDL of > 50%, moderate-
intensity as lowering by 30–50% or by specific medication and dosing 
guidelines (ie, atorvastatin 80 mg).
■ Smokers of all ages:  Screen for dyslipidemias due to their ↑ risk.
■ First intervention:  12-week trial of diet and exercise in a patient with no 
known ASCVD. Commonly used lipid-lowering agents are listed in 
Table 2.1-13.
■ Secondary hyperlipidemia:  Treat underlying cause.
 KEY FACT
Dyslipidemia:
■ LDL >  130 mg/dL or
■ HDL <  40 mg/dL.
cLass exaMpLes eFFect on LIpId proFILe sIde eFFects
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors 
(statins)
Atorvastatin, simvastatin, lovastatin, 
pravastatin, rosuvastatin
↓ LDL, ↓ triglycerides ↑ LFTs, myositis, warfarin potentiation
Lipoprotein lipase stimulators 
(fibrates)
Gemfibrozil ↓ Triglycerides, ↑ HDL GI upset, cholelithiasis, myositis  
(especially in combination with 
statins), ↑ LFTs, pancreatitis
Cholesterol absorption inhibitors Ezetimibe ↓ LDL Diarrhea, abdominal pain. Can cause 
angioedema
Niacin Niaspan ↑ HDL, ↓ LDL Skin flushing (can be prevented with 
ASA, due to ↑ prostaglandins), pares-
thesias, pruritus, GI upset, ↑ LFTs
Bile acid resins Cholestyramine, colestipol, 
colesevelam
↓ LDL Constipation, GI upset, LFT abnor-
malities, myalgias. Can ↓ absorption of 
other drugs from the small intestine
Proprotein convertase subtilisin/
kexin type 9 (PCSK9) inhibitors
Evolocumab, alirocumab (injectable 
medications taken every 2–4 weeks)
↓↓ LDL Injection-site swelling, rash, muscle/
limb pain, backache
TABLE 2.1-13.  Lipid-L owering Agents
patIent age crIterIa treatMent
≥ 21 years Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) (eg, CAD, CVA, or PAD) High-intensity statin
≥ 21 years LDL ≥ 190 mg/dL High-intensity statin
40–75 years LDL 70–189 mg/dL without ASCVD or diabetes ≥ 7.5% 10-year risk → high-intensity statin
5–7.5% 10-year risk → moderate-intensity statin
≤ 5% 10-year risk → no statin
40–75 years LDL 70–189 mg/dL with diabetes ≥ 7.5% 10-year risk → high-intensity statin
≤ 7.5% 10-year risk → moderate-intensity statin
≤ 75 years ASCVD High-intensity statin
TABLE 2.1-12.  A merican College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Treatment Guidelines
40 HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN CARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   40 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 58 ---
Hypertension
A major risk factor for stroke and MI. Defined as systolic BP ≥ 140 mm Hg 
and/or diastolic BP ≥ 90 mm Hg based on three measurements separated in 
time in adults (see Table 2.1-14). Classified as 1° or 2°.
1° (ESSENTIAL) HYPERTENSION
Hypertension with no identifiable cause. Represents 95% of cases of HTN. 
Risk factors include a family history of HTN or heart disease, a high-
sodium diet, smoking, obesity, ethnicity (African-Americans >  whites), and 
advanced age.
History/PE
■ HTN is usually asymptomatic until complications develop.
■ Patients should be evaluated for end-organ damage to the brain (stroke, 
dementia), eye (cotton-wool exudates, hemorrhage, retinopathy), heart 
(LVH), and kidney (proteinuria, CKD). Renal bruits may signify renal 
artery stenosis as the cause of HTN.
 KEY FACT
PCSK9 inhibitors are a new class 
of LDL-lowering drugs. They 
significantly increase hepatic 
clearance of LDL. Indicated in familial 
hypercholesterolemia and statin-
resistant or -intolerant patients with 
severe hyperlipidemia.
bp category bp treat or FoLLow-up
Normal SBP < 120 mm Hg
and
DBP < 80 mm Hg
Yearly evaluation
Lifestyle modifications to maintain normal BP
Elevated SBP 120–129 mm Hg
and
DBP < 80 mm Hg
Recommend healthy lifestyle changes
Reassess in 3–6 months
Hypertension: stage 1 SBP ≥ 130–139 mm Hg
or
DBP ≥ 80–89 mm Hg
Assess 10-year risk for heart disease and stroke (ASCVD)
■ <  10% 10-year risk:
■ Lif estyle recommendations
■ R eassess in 3–6 months
■ >  10% 10-year risk or the patient has known CVD, diabetes mellitus, or CKD, lifestyle 
changes, and BP-lowering medication:
■ R eassess in 1 month for effectiveness of medication therapy
■ I f goal is met after 1 month, reassess in 3–6 months
■ I f goal is not met after 1 month, consider different medication or titration; continue 
monthly follow-up until control is achieved
Hypertension: stage 2 SBP ≥ 140 mm Hg
or
DBP ≥  90 mm Hg
Recommend healthy lifestyle changes and BP-lowering medication (two medications of 
different classes)
■ R eassess in 1 month for effectiveness:
■ I f goal is met after 1 month, reassess in 3–6 months
■ I f goal is not met after 1 month, consider different medications or titration
■ C ontinue monthly follow-up until control is achieved
a Based on 2017 report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines.
TABLE 2.1-14.  A merican College of Cardiology/American Heart Association BP Guidelines a
A woman is found with pulseless 
electrical activity on hospital day 7 
after suffering a lateral wall STEMI. The 
ACLS protocol is initiated. What is the 
next best step?
41HIGH-YIELD FACTS INCARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   41 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 59 ---
Diagnosis
■ Quantify overall risk:  Fasting glucose, HBA1c, lipid profile.
■ Assess end-organ damage:  ECG to check for LVH or past MI, urinalysis 
for proteinuria or hematuria; BUN/creatinine.
■ Exclude secondary causes (as required):  U&Es, Ca 2+, renal ultrasound, 
24-hour urine metanephrine, renin, aldosterone, urinary cortisol.
■ 24-hour ambulatory BP monitoring (ABPM) may be useful sometimes (ie, 
“white coat” or borderline hypertension).
trEatmEnt
■ Begin with lifestyle modifications (weight loss, exercise, smoking cessa -
tion, diet improvement, limit alcohol and salt intake).
■ BP goals vary by category and ASCVD (see Table 2.1-14).
■ Diuretics, CCBs, ACEIs, and β-blockers have been shown to ↓ mortality 
in uncomplicated HTN. They are first-line agents unless a comorbid con-
dition requires another medication (see Table 2.1-15).
■ For patients who are not African-American, including those with diabetes, 
→
 ACEI/ARB (nephroprotective), thiazide, CCB.
■ For African American patients, including those with diabetes, → thiazide, 
CCB.
■ For patients ≥ 18 years of age with CKD → ACEI/ARB (nephro-
protective).
■ If BP goal is not reached within 1 month of commencing treatment, 
↑  dose of initial drug or add a second drug, and if goal BP cannot be 
reached with two drugs, add and titrate a third drug. Poorer outcomes are 
seen if ACEIs and ARBs are used together.
■ Periodically test for end-organ complications, including renal complica -
tions (BUN, creatinine, urine protein-to-creatinine ratio), hypertensive ret-
inopathy (eye exam), and cardiac complications (ECG evidence of LVH).
2° HYPERTENSION
Hypertension 2° to an identifiable organic cause (∼5% of cases). See 
Table 2.1-16 for the diagnosis and treatment of common causes.
 MNEMONIC
Treatment of HTN—
ABCD
ACEIs/ARBs
𝛃-blockers
CCBs
Diuretics (typically thiazide diuretics)
 MNEMONIC
Causes of 2° hypertension—
CHAPS
Cushing syndrome
Hyperaldosteronism (Conn syndrome)
Aortic coarctation
Pheochromocytoma
Stenosis of renal arteries
RECENT 
Renal causes (renal artery stenosis, PKD)
Endocrine (Conn syndrome, Cushing 
syndrome, hyperparathyroidism, 
pheochromocytoma)
Coarctation of the aorta
Estrogen (OCP)
Neurologic (ICP)
Thyroid disorder popuLatIon agents
Uncomplicated Diuretics, CCBs, ACEIs
CHF Diuretics, β-blockers, ACEIs, ARBs, aldosterone antagonists
Diabetes Diuretics, ACEIs, ARBs, CCBs
Post-MI β-blockers, ACEIs, ARBs, aldosterone antagonists
Chronic kidney disease ACEIs, ARBs
BPH Diuretics, α1-adrenergic blockers
Isolated systolic HTN Diuretics, ACEIs, CCBs (dihydropyridines)
Pregnancy Methyldopa, β-blockers (typically labetalol), hydralazine
TABLE 2.1-15.  T reatment of 1° Hypertension in Specific Populations
This patient has probably suffered a 
left ventricular free-wall rupture with 
acute cardiac tamponade. Emergent 
pericardiocentesis is the next best 
therapeutic and diagnostic step.
42 HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN CARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   42 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 60 ---
HYPERTENSIVE CRISES
A spectrum of clinical presentations in which there is a severe increase in BP 
(usually > 180/120 mm Hg) that can lead to end-organ damage.
History/PE
Present with end-organ damage revealed by acute kidney injury, severe chest 
pain (ischemia, MI), back pain (aortic dissection), stroke, severe headache 
with changes in mental status (hypertensive encephalopathy), and blurred 
vision. Other symptoms include nausea and vomiting, seizures, shortness of 
breath, and severe anxiety.
etIoLogy descrIptIon ManageMent
1° Renal disease Often unilateral renal parenchymal disease Treat with ACEIs, which slow the progression of renal 
disease
Renal artery stenosis Especially common in patients <  25 and > 50 years of age 
with recent-onset HTN
Etiologies include fibromuscular dysplasia (younger patients) 
and atherosclerosis (older patients)
Often present with headaches and bruits in abdomen/neck
Diagnose with MRA, CT angiography, or renal artery 
Doppler ultrasound
May be treated with angioplasty or stenting. Consider 
ACEIs in unilateral disease. (In bilateral disease, 
ACEIs can accelerate kidney failure by preferential 
vasodilation of the efferent arteriole.) Open surgery 
is a second option if angioplasty is not effective or 
feasible
OCP use Common in women > 35 years of age, obese women, and 
those with long-standing use
Discontinue OCPs (effect may be delayed)
Pheochromocytoma An adrenal gland tumor that secretes epinephrine and nor-
epinephrine, leading to episodic headache, sweating, and 
tachycardia
Diagnose with urinary metanephrines and catechol-
amine levels or plasma metanephrine
Surgical removal of tumor after treatment with 
α-blockers followed by β-blockers
Conn syndrome 
(hyperaldosteronism)
Most often 2° to an aldosterone-producing adrenal adenoma
Causes the triad of HTN, unexplained hypokalemia, and 
metabolic alkalosis
Metabolic workup with plasma aldosterone and renin 
level; ↑ aldosterone and ↓ renin levels suggest 1° 
hyperaldosteronism. Surgical removal of tumor
Cushing syndrome Due to an ACTH-producing pituitary tumor, an ectopic ACTH-
secreting tumor, or cortisol secretion by an adrenal adenoma 
or carcinoma. Also due to exogenous steroid exposure. (See 
the Endocrinology chapter for more details)
Surgical removal of tumor; removal of exogenous 
steroids
Coarctation of the aorta See the Pediatrics chapter Surgical correction
Hyperparathyroidism Either alone or as part of MEN type 2 (with 
pheochromocytoma)
Look for ↑ calcium and vascular/valvular calcification
Treat underlying hyperparathyroidism
TABLE 2.1-16.  C ommon Causes of 2° Hypertension
A 40-year-old man presents for a 
routine exam. His exam is significant 
for a BP of 145/75 mm Hg but is 
otherwise unremarkable, as are his 
lab results. What is the next best 
step?
43HIGH-YIELD FACTS INCARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   43 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 61 ---
Diagnosis
■ Hypertensive urgency:  ↑ BP with mild to moderate symptoms (headache, 
chest pain, nausea and vomiting) without end-organ damage.
■ Hypertensive emergency: ↑ BP with signs or symptoms of impending 
end-organ damage such as acute kidney injury, intracranial or retinal 
hemorrhage, papilledema, stroke, or ECG changes suggestive of ischemia, 
MI, or pulmonary edema.
trEatmEnt
■ Hypertensive urgency:  BP can be reduced gradually over 24–48 hours with 
oral antihypertensives (eg, β-blockers, clonidine, ACEIs) (see Table 2.1-17).
■ Hypertensive emergency: BP must be reduced immediately to prevent 
imminent organ damage. Treat with IV medications (labetalol, nitroprus-
side, nicardipine) with the goal of lowering mean arterial pressure by no 
more than 25% over the first 2 hours to prevent cerebral hypoperfusion or 
coronary insufficiency.
 KEY FACT
Hypertensive emergencies are 
diagnosed on the basis of the 
extent of end-organ damage, not BP 
measurement.
With a single BP recording and no 
evidence of end-organ damage, the 
next best step should consist of a 
repeat BP measurement at the end 
of the exam with a return visit if BP is 
still high.
cLass agents MecHanIsM oF actIon sIde eFFects
Diuretics Thiazide, loop, K + sparing
Ethacrynic acid is the only nonsulfa 
loop diuretic that can be used in 
severe sulfa allergy patients
↓ Extracellular fluid volume and 
thereby ↓ vascular resistance
Hypokalemia (not with K+ sparing), 
hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia, hyper-
uricemia, azotemia
β-blockers Propranolol, metoprolol, nadolol,  
atenolol, timolol, carvedilol, 
labetalol
↓ Cardiac contractility and renin 
release
Bronchospasm (in severe active asthma), 
bradycardia, CHF exacerbation, impo-
tence, fatigue, depression
ACEIs Captopril, enalapril, fosinopril, bena-
zepril, lisinopril
Blocks the conversion of angio-
tensin I to angiotensin II, reducing 
peripheral resistance and salt/
water retention. Bradykinin ↑ due 
to the ↓ activation of ACE
Cough and angioedema (due to ↑ brady-
kinin build-up), rashes, leukopenia, 
hyperkalemia
ARBs Losartan, valsartan, irbesartan Blocks the activation of angiotensin 
II receptor, reducing periph-
eral resistance and salt/water 
retention
Rashes, leukopenia, and hyperkalemia 
but no cough
CCBs Dihydro pyridines (nifedipine, 
felodipine, amlodipine), nondihy-
dropyridines (diltiazem, verapamil)
↓ Smooth muscle tone and cause 
vasodilation; may also ↓ cardiac 
output
Dihydropyridines: headache, flushing, 
peripheral edema
Nondihydropyridines: ↓ Contractility
Vasodilators Hydralazine, minoxidil ↓ Peripheral resistance by dilating 
arteries/arterioles
Hydralazine: headache, lupus-like syndrome
Minoxidil: orthostasis, hirsutism
α
1-adrenergic 
blockers
Prazosin, terazosin, 
phenoxybenzamine
Cause vasodilation by blocking 
actions of norepinephrine on 
vascular smooth muscle
Orthostatic hypotension
Centrally acting 
adrenergic 
agonists
Methyldopa, clonidine Inhibit the sympathetic nervous 
system via central α
2-adrenergic 
receptors
Somnolence, orthostatic hypotension, 
impotence, rebound HTN
TABLE 2.1-17.  M ajor Classes of Antihypertensive Agents
44 HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN CARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   44 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 62 ---
Pericardial Disease
Consists of pericarditis, constrictive pericarditis, and pericardial tamponade. 
Results from acute or chronic pericardial insults; may lead to pericardial 
effusion.
PERICARDITIS
Inflammation of the pericardial sac. It can compromise cardiac output via tam-
ponade (extravasation of large amounts of fluid secondary to pericarditis) or 
constrictive pericarditis (chronic pericarditis). Most commonly idiopathic, 
although known etiologies include viral infection (most common infection, 
likely etiology Coxsackie B virus), Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, tuberculosis 
(TB), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), uremia, drugs, radiation, connective 
tissue disorder (ie, rheumatoid arthritis, Goodpasture syndrome), and neo-
plasms. May also occur after MI (either within days after MI or as a delayed 
phenomenon; ie, Dressler syndrome) or open-heart surgery (see Figure 2.1-14).
History/PE
■ Presentation:  Sharp pleuritic chest pain, dyspnea, cough, and fever.
■ Key feature:  Chest pain tends to worsen in the supine position and with 
inspiration. Classically, patient is seen sitting up (pain improves in prone 
position) and bending forward.
■ Exam:  May reveal a pericardial friction rub. Elevated JVP, tachycardia, 
muffled S1 and S 2, and pulsus paradoxus (a ↓ in systolic BP >10 mm Hg 
on inspiration) can be present with pericardial tamponade. Kussmaul sign 
can be present with constrictive pericarditis.
Diagnosis
■ ECG:  Include diffuse ST-segment elevation and PR-segment depressions 
followed by T-wave inversions (see Figure 2.1-15). Classically shows con-
cave (saddle-shaped) ST segment elevation.
 KEY FACT
Pericardial calcification seen on chest 
x-ray (CXR) strongly suggest constrictive 
pericarditis due to chronic fibrosis and 
calcification of the pericardium.
 MNEMONIC
Causes of pericarditis—
CARDIAC RINDS
Collagen vascular disease
Aortic dissection
Radiation
Drugs
Infections
Acute renal failure
Cardiac (MI) and Connective tissue disease
Rheumatic fever
Injury
Neoplasms
Dressler syndrome
Surgery (postpericardiotomy syndrome)
FIGURE 2.1-14.  Radiographic findings in pericarditis. Contrast-enhanced CT at the 
level of the interventricular septum demonstrates a small pericardial effusion, with thickening 
and increased enhancement of the pericardium consistent with infection in this postsurgical 
patient. The air outlining the pericardium anteriorly is the result of dehiscence of the median 
sternotomy. 
(Reproduced with permission from USMLE-Rx.com.)
45HIGH-YIELD FACTS INCARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   45 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 63 ---
■ CXR:  Cardiomegaly may indicate a pericardial effusion.
■ Blood tests:  FBC, ESR, U&Es, cardiac enzymes (troponin may be raised), 
viral serology, and if indicated, autoantibodies, fungal precipitins, and 
TFTs.
■ Echo:  Pericardial thickening or effusion may be evident.
trEatmEnt
■ Treat the underlying cause (eg, corticosteroids/immunosuppressants for 
SLE, dialysis for uremia) or symptoms (eg, ASA for post-MI pericarditis, 
ASA/NSAIDs 
for viral pericarditis or Dressler syndrome). Avoid corticoste-
roids within a few days after MI, as they can predispose to ventricular wall 
rupture.
■ Treat idiopathic cases with NSAIDs such as ibuprofen, naproxen, or indo -
methacin. Consider colchicine for relapse or persistent symptoms.
■ Pericardial effusions without symptoms can be monitored, but evidence 
of tamponade requires pericardiocentesis with continuous drainage as 
needed.
CARDIAC TAMPONADE
Excess fluid in the pericardial sac ↑ the intrapericardial pressure, leading to 
compromised ventricular filling and ↓ cardiac output. The rate of fluid for-
mation is more important than the size of the effusion. Risk factors include 
pericarditis, malignancy, SLE, TB, and trauma (commonly stab wounds 
medial to the left nipple).
History/PE
■ Presents with fatigue, dyspnea, anxiety, tachycardia, and tachypnea that 
can rapidly progress to shock and death.
■ Exam of a patient with acute tamponade may reveal Beck triad (hypoten -
sion, distant or muffled S 1 and S2 heart sounds, and JVD), a narrow pulse 
pressure, and pulsus paradoxus.
■ Lung fields are clear on exam.
 KEY FACT
ST-segment elevations in pericarditis 
are differentiated from MI in that 
they are not localized to one region 
of the heart; widespread ST-segment 
elevations are seen.
I aVR
PR
PR
ST
STV1
V2
V3
V4
V5
V6
aVL
aVF
II
III
FIGURE 2.1-15.  Acute pericarditis. Diffuse ST-segment elevations in multiple leads not 
consistent with any discrete coronary vascular territory and PR-segment depressions. (Reproduced 
with permission from USMLE-Rx.com.)
46 HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN CARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   46 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 64 ---
Diagnosis
■ Echo is diagnostic and shows right atrial and right ventricular diastolic col -
lapse and echo-free zone around the heart.
■ CXR may show an enlarged, globular, water-bottle-shaped heart with a 
large effusion (see 
Figure 2.1-16).
■ If present on ECG, electrical alternans is diagnostic of a large pericardial 
effusion
.
trEatmEnt
■ Aggressive volume expansion with IV fluids.
■ Urgent pericardiocentesis (aspirate will be non-clotting blood). Send fluid 
to lab analysis to determine etiology.
■ Decompensation or recurrent cases may warrant pericardial window.
Valvular Heart Disease
Until recently, rheumatic fever (which affects the mitral valve more often than 
the aortic valve) was the most common cause of valvular heart disease in US 
adults; the leading cause is now mechanical degeneration. Subtypes are listed in 
Table 2.1-18 along with their etiologies, presentation, diagnosis, and treatment.
Vascular Diseases
AORTIC ANEURYSM
Greater than 50% dilation of all three layers of the aortic wall. Aortic aneu-
rysms are most commonly associated with atherosclerosis. Most are abdomi-
nal, and > 90% originate below the renal arteries.
■ Ascending aortic aneurysm—think cystic medial necrosis or connective 
tissue disease.
■ Descending aortic aneurysm—think atherosclerosis.
■ Complications:  Rupture, thrombosis, embolism, fistulae, pressure on sur-
rounding structures.
History/PE
■ Usually asymptomatic and discovered incidentally on exam or radiologic 
study. It may cause mild abdominal or back pain.
■ Exam demonstrates a pulsatile abdominal mass or abdominal bruits.
■ Risk factors include HTN, high cholesterol, other vascular disease, a ⊕ 
family history, smoking (strongest predictor of rupture), gender (males 
> 
females), and age.
■ Ruptured aneurysm leads to hypotension and severe, tearing abdominal 
pain that radiates to the back, iliac fossae, or groin, and syncope
.
Diagnosis
■ Screening:  All men 65–75 years of age with a history of smoking are recom-
mended for a one-time screening by ultrasound for AAA (see Figure 2.1-17).
■ Abdominal ultrasound is used for diagnosis or to follow the course of an 
aneurysm over time.
■ CT with contrast or MRA may be useful to determine the precise anatomy.
 KEY FACT
Beck triad can diagnose acute cardiac 
tamponade:
■ JVD.
■ Hypotension.
■ Distant S1 and S2 heart sounds.
 KEY FACT
Size of AAA determines treatment:
■ <  5 cm → monitoring.
■ >  5 cm → surgical correction.
A 20-year-old man presents with 
an initial BP of 150/85 mm Hg, 
and repeat measurement yields 
147/85 mm Hg. The patient’s 
potassium level is 3.2 mg/dL. What is 
the next appropriate diagnostic step?
FIGURE 2.1-16.  Pericardial effu-
sion. Water-bottle-shaped heart seen on 
CXR with pericardial effusion. (Reproduced 
with permission from Chen MY et al. Basic Radiology, 
2nd ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2011.)
47HIGH-YIELD FACTS INCARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   47 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 65 ---
trEatmEnt
■ In asymptomatic patients, monitoring is appropriate for lesions < 5 cm.
■ Surgical correction is indicated if the lesion is ≥ 5.5 cm (abdominal), 
> 6 cm (thoracic), or smaller but rapidly enlarging (watch for bowel isch-
emia and infarction).
■ Emergent surgery for symptomatic or ruptured aneurysms.
type etIoLogy HIstory exaM/dIagnosIs treatMent
Aortic stenosis Most often seen in the 
elderly (senile calcific 
aortic stenosis)
Unicuspid in childhood 
and adolescence. Rheu-
matic heart disease can 
predispose to AS
May be asymptomatic for 
years despite significant 
stenosis
Once symptomatic, usually 
progresses from angina 
to syncope to CHF to 
death within 2 years
Sx (also indications for 
valve replacements):
ACS—Angina, CHF, 
Syncope
PE: Pulsus parvus et tardus 
(weak, delayed carotid 
upstroke) and a single 
or paradoxically split S2 
sound; systolic crescendo-
decrescendo murmur at the 
right second intercostal space 
radiating to the carotids
Severe AS characterized by 
soft and single S2
Dx: Echocardiography
Aortic valve replacement 
(surgical or transcatheter 
methods)
Aortic 
regurgitation
Acute: Infective endocar-
ditis, aortic dissection, 
chest trauma, MI
Chronic: Valve malforma-
tions, rheumatic fever, 
connective tissue 
disorders (ie, Marfan 
syndrome), syphilis, 
inflammatory disorders
Acute: Rapid onset of 
pulmonary congestion, 
cardiogenic shock, and 
severe dyspnea
Chronic: Slowly progres-
sive onset of dyspnea 
on exertion, orthopnea, 
and PND. Uncomfort-
able heart pounding 
when lying on left side
PE: Early blowing diastolic 
murmur at the left sternal 
border, mid-diastolic rumble 
(Austin Flint murmur), and 
midsystolic apical murmur
Widened pulse pressure causes 
de Musset sign (head bob 
with heartbeat), Corrigan 
sign (water-hammer pulse; 
wide and bounding), and 
Duroziez sign (femoral bruit)
Dx: Echocardiography
Vasodilator therapy 
(dihydropyridines or 
ACEIs) for isolated aortic 
regurgitation until symp-
toms become severe 
enough to warrant valve 
replacement. Digoxin 
and diuretics have little 
benefit
Monitor LV function and 
size
Mitral valve 
stenosis
The most common eti-
ology continues to be 
rheumatic fever
Uncommon in the US
Sx: Include dyspnea, 
orthopnea, PND, and 
hemoptysis. Unique fea-
tures secondary to LAE 
include AF, dysphagia, 
and hoarseness
PE: Opening snap and mid-
diastolic murmur at the 
apex; pulmonary edema
Dx: Echocardiography
Antiarrhythmics (β-blockers, 
digoxin, or CCBs) and 
warfarin for AF. Mitral 
balloon valvotomy and 
valve replacement are 
effective for severe cases
Mitral valve 
regurgitation
Primarily 2° to rheumatic 
fever or chordae ten-
dineae rupture after MI
Myxomatous degenera-
tion due to mitral valve 
prolapse
Infective endocarditis
Patients present with 
dyspnea, orthopnea, 
PND, and fatigue
PE: Holosystolic/pansystolic 
murmur radiating to the 
axilla
Dx: Echocardiography will 
demonstrate regurgitant 
flow; angiography can assess 
the severity of disease
ACEIs or ARBs to vasodilate 
and ↓ rate of progression. 
Antiarrhythmics if neces-
sary (AF is common with 
LAE). Digoxin and diuretics 
may be needed in CHF
Valve repair or replacement 
for severe cases
TABLE 2.1-18.  T ypes of Valvular Heart Disease
A hyperaldosteronism workup with 
serum aldosterone and renin levels is 
an appropriate next diagnostic step.
48 HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN CARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   48 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 66 ---
AORTIC DISSECTION
A transverse tear in the intima of a vessel that results in blood entering the 
media, creating a false lumen and leading to a hematoma that propagates lon-
gitudinally. Most commonly 2° to HTN, but also due to blunt chest trauma. 
The most common sites of origin are above the aortic valve and distal to the 
left subclavian artery. Most often occurs at 40–60 years of age, with a greater 
frequency in males than in females.
History/PE
■ Hx:  HTN, Marfan syndrome, mitral valve prolapse, trauma.
■ Presentation:  Sudden tearing/ripping pain in the anterior chest (ascend-
ing) with or without radiation to the back (descending), typically between 
the scapulae.
■ Exam:
■ Patients are typically hypertensive. If hypotensive, consider pericardial 
tamponade, hypovolemia from blood loss, or other cardiopulmonary 
etiologies.
■ Asymmetric pulses and BP measurements or acute limb ischemia.
■ A murmur of aortic regurgitation may be heard if the aortic valve is 
involved with a proximal dissection.
■ Neurologic deficits, such as paraplegia, may be seen if the aortic arch 
or spinal arteries are involved.
■ Anuria may be seen if renal arteries are involved.
■ Signs of pericarditis or pericardial tamponade may be seen.
Diagnosis
■ Best initial test for hemodynamically stable patients:  CT angiography. 
MRA can be used if contrast CT is contraindicated.
■ Best initial test for hemodynamically unstable patients:  TEE. It may 
also be used to visualize details of the proximal aorta and coronary vessels 
and can also evaluate for pericardial effusion.
 KEY FACT
Aortic aneurysm is most often 
associated with atherosclerosis, 
whereas aortic dissection is commonly 
linked to HTN.
A 70-year-old man with HTN presents 
for a routine appointment. He quit 
smoking 20 years ago but has a 
20-pack-year history. What screening, 
if any, is indicated? 
FIGURE 2.1-17.  Abdominal aortic aneurysm. (A) Ultrasound image of an AAA (Ao, aorta). (B) Transaxial image from a 
contrast-enhanced CT showing an aneurysm with extensive mural thrombus (arrowhead). (Image A reproduced with permission from Tintinalli 
JE et al. Tintinalli’s Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide, 6th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2004. Image B reproduced with permission from Doherty GM. Cur-
rent Diagnosis & Treatment: Surgery, 13th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2010.)
Ao
A
 B
49HIGH-YIELD FACTS INCARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   49 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 67 ---
■ The Stanford system classifies any dissection proximal to the left subcla -
vian artery as type A and all others as type B (see Figure 2.1-18).
■ Type A (∼70%) is the most common and involves the ascending aorta, 
irrespective of the site of the tear. Type B does not involve the ascending 
aorta.
trEatmEnt
■ BP control:  Important to monitor and medically manage BP and heart 
rate as necessary. Avoid thrombolytics. Begin intravenous β-blockers (eg, 
IV labetalol) before starting vasodilators (nitroprusside) to prevent reflex 
tachycardia.
■ All patients with type A thoracic dissection (ascending dissections) should 
have surgery.
■ Patients with type B thoracic dissection (descending dissections) may be 
managed 
medically with BP and heart rate control; surgery is reserved if 
there is a leakage, rupture, or compromised organs.
DEEP VENOUS THROMBOSIS
Clot formation in the large veins of the extremities or pelvis. The classic 
Virchow triad of risk factors includes venous stasis (eg, from long-haul flights, 
prolonged bed rest, obesity, immobility, or incompetent venous valves in the 
lower extremities), endothelial trauma (eg, surgery, injury to the lower 
extremities, trauma), and hypercoagulable states (eg, thrombophilia, malig-
nancy, pregnancy, OCP use).
History/PE
■ Presents with unilateral lower extremity pain and swelling. Calf warmth, 
tenderness, and erythema may be present.
■ Homans sign is calf tenderness with passive foot dorsiflexion (poor sensitiv-
ity and specificity for DVT).
■ Use pretest clinical probability scoring for DVT, the Wells score.
 KEY FACT
Ascending aortic dissections are 
surgical emergencies; descending 
dissections are still emergencies but 
can often be treated medically.
 KEY FACT
Virchow triad: (1) venous stasis, 
(2) trauma (endothelial damage), 
(3) hypercoagulability
The United States Preventive Services 
Task Force (USPSTF) guidelines 
recommend one-time screening for 
AAA by ultrasound in men 65–75 
years of age who have ever smoked.
FIGURE 2.1-18.  Stanford classification of aortic dissection. Type A involves the ascend-
ing aorta and may progress to involve the arch and thoracoabdominal aorta. Type B involves 
the descending thoracic or thoracoabdominal aorta distal to the left subclavian artery without 
involvement of the ascending aorta. 
(Reproduced with permission from USMLE-Rx.com.)
Ascending
DescendingDescending
Type A Type B
Stanford Classiﬁcation
50 HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN CARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   50 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 68 ---
Diagnosis
■ D-dimer test should be ordered (sensitive but not specific) and is elevated 
in DVT. Also elevated in infections, malignancy, pregnancy, and postop
-
eratively. A negative result, combined with a low clinical probability is suf-
ficient to exclude a DVT.
■ If D-dimer is elevated and the patient has a high-to-intermediate clinical 
probability, Doppler ultrasound is done.
■ A spiral CT or V/Q scan may be used to evaluate for PE (see Figure 2.1-19).
trEatmEnt
■ Anticoagulate with subcutaneous low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) 
or IV unfractionated heparin followed by PO warfarin or NOACs for a 
total of 3–6 months.
■ In patients with contraindications for anticoagulation, inferior vena cava 
filters should be placed.
■ Hospitalized patients should receive DVT prophylaxis consisting of  
exercise as tolerated, antithromboembolic stockings, and subcutaneous 
LMWH or unfractionated heparin.
PERIPHERAL ARTERIAL DISEASE
Defined as a restriction of the blood supply to the extremities by atheroscle-
rotic plaque. The lower extremities are most commonly affected. Clinical 
manifestations depend on the vessels involved, the extent and rate of obstruc-
tion, and the presence of collateral blood flow.
History/PE
■ Presents with intermittent claudication; reproducible cramping pain in 
the calf, thigh, or buttock after walking for a certain distance (claudication 
distance) and is relieved with rest.
■ As the disease progresses, it causes critical limb ischemia. Pain occurs at 
rest and affects the distal extremities. Dorsal foot ulcerations may develop 
2° to poor perfusion. A painful, cold, numb foot is characteristic of critical 
limb ischemia.
 KEY FACT
A ⊝ D-dimer test can be used to rule 
out the possibility of PE in low-risk 
patients.
DVT
Clinical suspicion for
DVT or PE
Low
Assess clinical liklihood
PE
Not low
High
High
High
Not high
D-dimer
D-dimer
Normal
No DVT
No PE
Normal
Imaging 
test 
needed
Imaging 
test 
needed
FIGURE 2.1-19.  Algorithm for diagnostic imaging of deep vein thrombosis and pulmo-
nary embolism. (Reproduced with permission from USMLE-Rx.com)
51HIGH-YIELD FACTS INCARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   51 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 69 ---
■ For more proximal lesions, there will be claudication and weak pulses 
below the area of occlusion (ie, aortoiliac disease; [Leriche syndrome] is 
characterized by the triad of hip, thigh, and buttock claudication, impo
-
tence, and symmetric atrophy of bilateral lower extremities).
■ A Buerger angle of < 20 degrees and capillary filling of > 15 seconds are 
seen in severe ischemia.
■ Acute  ischemia:
■ May be due to thrombosis in situ ( ∼40), emboli usually of cardiac ori-
gin (∼38%), graft/angioplasty occlusion (∼15%), or trauma. Acute 
occlusions commonly occur at bifurcations distal to the last palpable 
pulse (see mnemonic for signs and symptoms).
■ May also be 2° to cholesterol atheroembolism (“blue toe syndrome”), 
which is characterized by blue toes, livedo reticularis, renal failure 
(often 2° to catheterization).
■ Chronic ischemia:  Lack of blood perfusion leads to muscle atrophy, pal-
lor, loss of sweat and sebaceous glands, cyanosis, hair loss, and gangrene/
necrosis.
Diagnosis
■ Identify cardiovascular risk factors, especially smoking, diabetes, hyperten -
sion, and hyperlipidemia.
■ Best initial test:  Ankle-brachial index test; can provide objective evidence 
of atherosclerosis (rest pain usually occurs with an ABI < 0.4). A very high 
ABI can indicate calcification of the arteries.
■ Doppler ultrasound: Identifies stenosis and occlusion. Normal ankle 
Doppler readings are > 90% of brachial readings.
■ Most accurate test:  Angiography; often not necessary unless revasculariza-
tion is indicated.
trEatmEnt
■ Treat acute symptomatic ischemia with heparin and prompt revascu -
larization.
■ Address modifiable risk factors:  Smoking (vital), hypertension, hyperlip-
idemia, and diabetes.
■ Educate regarding careful hygiene and foot care. Exercise helps develop 
collateral circulation.
■ Antiplatelet agents (ASA or vorapaxar) do not consistently reduce symp -
toms, but ↓ the risk for associated cardiovascular mortality.
■ Cilostazol is effective medication in intermittent claudication.
■ Surgery (arterial bypass), percutaneous transluminal angioplasty, and 
stenting, or amputation can be employed when conservative treatment 
fails or in acute limb ischemia
.
LYMPHEDEMA
A disruption of the lymphatic circulation that results in peripheral edema and 
chronic infection of the extremities. Primary (or congenital) lymphedema is 
rare. Most often caused secondarily by surgeries involving lymph node dissec-
tion or, in developing countries, parasitic infections.
History/PE
History will differ by cause. Examples include the following:
■ Postmastectomy patients present with unexplained swelling of the upper 
extremity (secondary to surgery).
 MNEMONIC
The 6 P’s of acute ischemia—
Pain
Pallor
Paralysis
Pulse deficit
Paresthesias
Poikilothermia
 KEY FACT
ABI = Pleg/Parm
Rest pain seen with an ABI < 0.4. 
(normal ABI: 1.0–1.2)
 KEY FACT
Calf claudication = femoral disease
Buttock claudication = iliac disease
Buttock claudication + impotence =  
Leriche syndrome (aortoiliac occlusive 
disease)
 KEY FACT
The major cause of mortality in patients 
with PAD is cardiovascular disease (MI, 
stroke); there is a 20–30% risk for these 
complications. There is only a 1–2% risk 
for developing limb ischemia.
52 HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN CARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   52 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 70 ---
■ Patients originating from developing countries present with progressive 
swelling of the lower extremities bilaterally with no cardiac abnormali
-
ties (ie, filariasis infection).
■ Children present with progressive, bilateral swelling of the extremities (1°).
■ Patients with Turner syndrome will have lymphatic edema.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is clinical. Rule out other causes of edema, such as cardiac and 
metabolic disorders.
trEatmEnt
■ Directed at symptom management, including exercise, massage ther -
apy, and pressure garments to mobilize and limit fluid accumulation.
■ Diuretics are ineffective and relatively contraindicated.
■ Maintain vigilance for cellulitis with prompt gram- ⊕ antibiotic cover -
age for infection.
Syncope
A sudden, temporary loss of consciousness and postural tone 2° to cerebral 
hypoperfusion. Etiologies can be cardiac, neurologic, or other.
■ Cardiac:  Valvular lesions (aortic stenosis), arrhythmias, PE, cardiac 
tamponade, aortic dissection.
■ Neurologic:  Subarachnoid hemorrhage.
■ Other:  Orthostatic/hypovolemic hypotension, metabolic abnormalities, 
neurocardiogenic syndromes (eg, vasovagal/micturition syncope), psy-
chiatric, medications.
History/PE
■ Age, triggers, prodromal symptoms, and associated symptoms should be 
investigated.
■ Syncope can be confused with seizures. Unlike syncope, seizures may 
be characterized by a preceding aura, tonic-clonic activity, tongue-
biting, bladder and bowel incontinence, and a postictal phase.
■ Cardiac causes of syncope are typically associated with very brief or 
absent prodromal symptoms, a history of exertion, lack of association 
with changes in position, and/or a history of cardiac disease.
■ Neurocardiogenic syndrome is common in younger patients and older 
patients with difficulty voiding.
Diagnosis
Depending on the suspected etiology:
■ Cardiac:  ECG, Holter monitors or 2-week event recorders (arrhyth-
mias), echocardiograms (structural abnormalities), stress tests (ischemia).
■ Neurologic:  CT of head (ischemia or hemorrhage) and EEG (seizure).
■ Other:  Orthostatic BP readings (hypovolemia, autonomic dysfunction), 
glucose (hypoglycemia), and tilt-table testing (neurally mediated syncope).
trEatmEnt
Tailored to the etiology.
 KEY FACT
Cardiac syncope is associated with 
1-year sudden cardiac death rates of up 
to 40%.
53HIGH-YIELD FACTS INCARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   53 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 71 ---
NOTES
54 HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN CARDIOVASCULAR
2019_02.01_Step2CK_Cardio_10e_015-054.indd   54 8/28/18   12:28 PM
--- PAGE 72 ---
Layers of the Skin 56
Allergic and Immune-Mediated Skin Disorders
 57
Hypersensitivity reactions 57
atopic Dermatitis (eczema) 59
contact Dermatitis 60
seborrHeic Dermatitis 60
stasis Dermatitis 61
psoriasis 61
Urticaria (Hives) 62
DrUg erUption 63
erytHema mUltiforme 64
stevens-JoHnson synDrome/toxic epiDermal necrolysis 65
erytHema noDosUm 66
bUlloUs pempHigoiD/pempHigUs vUlgaris 66
Infectious Disease Manifestations of the Skin 67
viral Diseases 67
bacterial infections 71
fUngal infections 75
parasitic infections 77
Ischemic Skin Disorders 79
DecUbitUs Ulcers 79
gangrene 79
Miscellaneous Skin Disorders 80
acantHosis nigricans 80
licHen planUs 80
rosacea 81
pityriasis rosea 81
vitiligo 82
eyeliD lesions 83
epiDermal inclUsion cysts 83
Dermatofibroma 83
HiDraDenitis sUppUrativa 83
icHtHyosis vUlgaris 83
age-relateD skin cHanges 83
sUn protection 84
sUnbUrn 84
Neoplasms of the Skin 84
seborrHeic keratosis 84
actinic keratosis 84
cUtaneoUs sqUamoUs cell carcinoma 85
basal cell carcinoma 85
melanoma 86
kaposi sarcoma 86
mycosis fUngoiDes (cUtaneoUs t-cell lympHoma) 88
cHerry angiomas (Hemangiomas) 88
55
HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN
DERMATOLOGY
2019_02.02_Step2CK_Derm_10e_055-088.indd   55 8/28/18   12:32 PM
--- PAGE 73 ---
Layers of the Skin
The skin is the largest organ in the human body. It provides a barrier and 
immunologic protection against the environment, regulates body tempera-
ture, fluids, and electrolytes, and allows for touch and sensation. Figures 2.2-1 
and 2.2-2 and Table 2.2-1 outline the skin layers, cell junctions, and common 
terminology related to the skin.
Lesion CharaCteristiCs exampLes
Macule Flat lesion < 1 cm Freckle, labial macule (see Image A)
Patch Flat lesion > 1 cm Birthmark (congenital nevus) (see Image B)
Papule Elevated solid lesion < 1 cm Mole (nevus) (see Image C), acne
Plaque Elevated lesion > 1 cm Psoriasis (see Image D)
Vesicle Small fluid-containing blister < 1 cm Chickenpox (varicella), shingles (zoster) (see Image E)
Bulla Large fluid-containing blister > 1 cm Bullous pemphigoid (see Image F)
Cyst Epithelium-lined sac containing material or fluid Pilar cyst (follicular cyst on scalp)
Pustule Vesicle containing pus Pustular psoriasis (see Image G)
Wheal Transient edematous papule or plaque Hives (urticarial) (see Image H)
Scale Flaking off of stratum corneum Eczema, psoriasis, SCC (see Image I)
Crust Exudate of dried serum, blood, and/or pus Impetigo (see Image J)
Ulcer Defect extending through the epidermis and upper dermis Diabetic foot ulcer
Lichenification Hypertrophy and thickening of the epidermis with accentuation of 
normal skin markings
Chronic scratching (pruritic scabies, eczema)
A
 B
 C
 D
 E
F
 G
 H
 I
 J
Images reproduced with permission from Dr. Richard Usatine.
TABLE 2.2-1.  Derma tologic Macroscopic Terms
56 HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN DERMATOLOGY
2019_02.02_Step2CK_Derm_10e_055-088.indd   56 8/28/18   12:32 PM
--- PAGE 74 ---
Allergic and Immune-Mediated Skin Disorders
HYPERSENSITIVITY REACTIONS
Table 2.2-2 outlines the types and mechanisms of hypersensitivity reactions.
FIGURE 2.2-1.  Layers of the skin. (Reproduced with permission from USMLE-Rx-com.)
Epidermal ridge
Free nerve ending
Dermal papilla
Corpuscle of touch
(Meissner corpuscle)
Arrector pili muscle
Hair follicle
Apocrine sweat gland
Sensory nerve
Lamellated (pacinian)
corpuscle
Eccrine sweat gland
Vein
Artery
Adipose tissue
Sweat pore
EPIDERMIS
Hair shaft
Capillary
loop
Sebaceous
(oil) gland DERMIS
SUBCUTANEOUS
LAYER
Hair root
FIGURE 2.2-2.  Epithelial cell junctions. (Reproduced with permission from USMLE-Rx.com.)
Tight junction (zonula occludens)—prevents paracellular 
movement of solutes; composed of claudins and occludins.
Adherens junction (zonula adherens)—below tight junction, 
forms “belt” connecting actin cytoskeletons of adjacent cells 
with CADherins (Ca
2+ -dependent adhesion proteins). Loss of 
E-cadherin promotes metastasis.
Desmosome (macula adherens)—structural support via keratin 
interactions. Autoantibodies /uni2192 pemphigus vulgaris.
Gap junction—channel proteins called connexons permit 
electrical and chemical communication between cells.
Hemidesmosome—connects keratin in basal cells to 
underlying basement membrane. Autoantibodies /uni2192bullous
pemphigoid. (Hemidesmosomes are down “
bullow”).
Integrins—membrane proteins that maintain 
integrity of basolateral membrane by binding 
to collagen and laminin in basement membrane.
Cell membrane
Basement membraneBasolateral
Apical
E-cadherin
Desmoplakin
Keratin
Connexon
with central
channel
Actin
/f_ilaments
57HIGH-YIELD FACTS INDERMATOLOGY
2019_02.02_Step2CK_Derm_10e_055-088.indd   57 8/28/18   12:32 PM
--- PAGE 75 ---
DesCription meChanism Comments exampLes
type i
Anaphylactic and atopic
Ag
Fc receptorMast cell or
basophil
IgE
Antigen cross-links preformed 
surface-bound IgE on mast 
cells and basophils, triggering 
the release of vasoactive 
amines like histamine
Reaction develops rapidly as a 
result of preformed antibody
First and Fast (like 
anaphylaxis)
Types I, II, and III are all anti-
body mediated
Anaphylaxis (bee sting, food 
allergy), asthma, urticaria, 
urticarial drug reactions, 
local wheal and flare
type ii
Cytotoxic
C
C
IgG
IgG
Cell
= complement
IgM and IgG bind to antigen 
on an “enemy” cell, leading 
to lysis by complement or 
phagocytosis
Cy-2-toxic
Antibody and comple-
ment lead to formation 
of the membrane attack 
complex (MAC)
Autoimmune hemolytic 
anemia, erythroblastosis 
fetalis, Goodpasture syn-
drome, rheumatic fever
type iii
Immune complex
 
Ag
Ag
C
Antigen-antibody complexes fix 
complement, which attracts 
PMNs; PMNs release lyso-
somal enzymes
Imagine an immune 
complex as three things 
stuck together: antigen-
antibody-complement
Includes many glomerulone-
phritides and vasculitides
Polyarteritis nodosa, immune 
complex glomerulonephritis, 
SLE, rheumatoid arthritis
type iV
Delayed (cell-mediated) type
APC
Th cells
Sensitized T lymphocytes 
encounter antigen and then 
release lymphokines (leading 
to macrophage activation)
Fourth and final 
(last)—delayed
Cell mediated, not antibody 
mediated; therefore, it is 
not transferable by serum
TB skin tests, transplant rejec-
tion, contact dermatitis
Modified with permission from Le T et al. First Aid for the USMLE Step 1 2016. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education; 2016.
TABLE 2.2-2.  T ypes and Mechanisms of Hypersensitivity Reactions
58 HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN DERMATOLOGY
2019_02.02_Step2CK_Derm_10e_055-088.indd   58 8/28/18   12:32 PM
--- PAGE 76 ---
ATOPIC DERMATITIS (ECZEMA)
A chronic inflammatory dermatitis that classically manifests in infancy and 
persists into adulthood. It is characterized by a defective epidermal barrier, 
causing sensitization, inflammation, pruritus, and ultimately lichenification 
(see Figure 2.2-3).
History/PE
■ Look for a strong family history of asthma, eczema, and allergic rhinitis 
(“atopic triad”) as well as food allergies
.
■ Patients are at ↑ risk for 2° bacterial (Staphylococcus aureus or Streptococ-
cus pyogenes) and viral (HSV or molluscum) infection due to constant 
waxing and waning cycles of pruritus and excoriation.
■ Triggers include climate, food, skin irritants, allergens, and emotional 
factors.
■ Manifestations by age group:
■ Infants:  Erythematous, edematous, weeping, pruritic vesicles, papules, 
and plaques on the face, scalp, and extensor surfaces of the extremities. 
The diaper area is often spared.
■ Children:  Dry, scaly, pruritic, excoriated vesicles, papules, and plaques 
in the flexural areas and neck.
■ Adults:  Lichenification and dry, fissured skin in a flexural distribution. 
Often, there is hand or eyelid involvement.
Diagnosis
Characteristic exam findings and history are sufficient. Excluding contact der-
matitis by history and anatomic distribution is important. KOH prep can help 
distinguish chronic eczema from tinea. Mild peripheral eosinophilia and 
↑ IgE may be seen but have no diagnostic value.
 KEY FACT
Long-term use of immunomodulating 
medications may ↑ the risk for 
developing lymphoma. 
 KEY FACT
Erythema toxicum neonatorum 
typically begins 1–3 days after delivery 
and presents with red papules, pustules, 
and/or vesicles with surrounding 
erythematous halos. ↑ Eosinophils are 
present in the pustules or vesicles. This 
benign eruption usually resolves in 
1–2 weeks with no treatment.
FIGURE 2.2-3.  Atopic dermatitis. Lichenification, excoriations, and ill-defined, scaly ery-
thematous plaques are characteristic. (Reproduced with permission from Tintinalli JE et al. Tintinalli’s Emergency 
Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide, 7th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2011.)
An infant with a history of eczema 
treated with corticosteroids is 
brought in with a new-onset rash and 
fever. Physical exam reveals grouped 
monomorphic vesicles involving 
eczematous areas of the infant’s 
extremities and face (see Figure 2.2-4). 
What is the appropriate therapy?
FIGURE 2.2-4.  (Reproduced with permis -
sion from Dr. Richard Usatine).
59HIGH-YIELD FACTS INDERMATOLOGY
2019_02.02_Step2CK_Derm_10e_055-088.indd   59 8/28/18   12:32 PM
--- PAGE 77 ---
trEatmEnt
■ The primary goal of therapy is to break the itch-scratch cycle with agents 
targeted at inflammation, pruritus, and xerosis (dry skin).
■ Topical corticosteroids are first-line therapy for flares, but watch out for 
atrophy, telangiectasias, and rebound flares with prolonged use. Topical 
calcineurin inhibitors (eg, tacrolimus) are useful as steroid-sparing agents 
for moderate to severe eczema for patients 
> 2 years of age.
■ H1-blockers may be used for relief of pruritus. Choose a first-generation 
H1-blocker (eg, hydroxyzine) for nighttime use.
■ Aggressive use of emollients, avoidance of harsh soaps, and limiting hot 
showers after resolution of acute flares will prevent future episodes.
CONTACT DERMATITIS
A type IV hypersensitivity reaction that results from contact with an allergen 
to which the patient has previously been exposed and sensitized such as 
nickel, poison ivy, perfumes/deodorants, and neomycin. More common in 
adults.
History/PE
■ Presents with pruritus and an eczematous rash, with the distribution of the 
rash often mimicking the contact event (see 
Figure 2.2-5). Characteristic 
distributions are seen where makeup, clothing, perfume, nickel jewelry, 
and plants come into contact with the skin.
■ Often described as a “linear” or “angular” rash. It can spread over the body 
via transfer of allergen by the hands or via circulating T-lymphocytes.
■ Frequently implicated allergens:  Poison ivy, poison oak, nickel, topical 
antibiotics, cosmetics, and latex. 
Diagnosis
Characteristic exam findings and history are sufficient. Excluding atopic der-
matitis (eczema) is important. Patch testing can be used to establish the caus-
ative allergen after the acute-phase eruption has been treated.
trEatmEnt
The best initial treatment is topical corticosteroids and allergen avoidance. In 
severe cases, a systemic corticosteroid may be needed.
SEBORRHEIC DERMATITIS
A common chronic inflammatory skin disease that may be caused by a reac-
tion to Malassezia furfur, a generally harmless yeast found in sebum and hair 
follicles. It has a predilection for areas with sebaceous glands.
History/PE
■ Rash presentation varies with age:
■ Infants:  Severe, red diaper rash with yellow scale, erosions, and blis-
ters. Scaling and crusting (“cradle cap”) may be seen on the scalp (see 
Figure 2.2-6A).
■ Children/adults:  Ill-defined red, scaly thin plaques are seen around the 
ears, eyebrows, nasolabial fold, midchest, and scalp (see Figure 2.2-6B).
■ Patients with HIV/AIDS, psychotic disorders, and Parkinson disease can 
develop severe, widespread seborrheic dermatitis.
 KEY FACT
Remember that patch testing results 
are affected by topical steroids 
and calcineurin inhibitors but 
not antihistamines, since type IV 
hypersensitivity reactions are not 
histamine-mediated.
FIGURE 2.2-5.  Contact dermatitis. 
Shown are erythematous papules and 
vesicles with serous weeping localized 
to areas of contact with the offending 
agent. 
(Reproduced with permission from Hurwitz 
RM. Pathology of the Skin: Atlas of Clinical-Pathological 
Correlation, 2nd ed. Stamford, CT: Appleton & Lange; 
1998.)
This infant has eczema herpeticum, a 
medical emergency that is due to the 
propensity for HSV infection to spread 
systemically, potentially affecting the 
brain. IV acyclovir must be started 
immediately!
60 HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN DERMATOLOGY
2019_02.02_Step2CK_Derm_10e_055-088.indd   60 8/28/18   12:32 PM
--- PAGE 78 ---
Diagnosis
Characteristic exam findings and history are sufficient. Can be confused with 
atopic dermatitis, contact dermatitis, tinea, or psoriasis.
trEatmEnt
Treat adults with ketoconazole, selenium sulfide or zinc pyrithione shampoos 
for the scalp, and topical antifungals (ketoconazole cream) and/or topical cor-
ticosteroids for other areas. Cradle cap often resolves with routine bathing and 
application of emollients in infants.
STASIS DERMATITIS
Lower extremity dermatitis due to venous hypertension forcing blood from 
the deep to the superficial venous system. Venous hypertension is often a 
result of venous valve incompetence or flow obstruction. It commonly 
involves the medial ankle in patients with deep vein thrombosis (DVT) his-
tory, chronic edema, and long periods of standing. If untreated, the area can 
become inflamed, exudative, and hyperpigmented from hemosiderin deposi-
tion (see Figure 2.2-7). Stasis ulcers may develop. Treat early with leg eleva-
tion, compression stockings, emollients, and topical steroids.
PSORIASIS
A T-cell–mediated inflammatory dermatosis characterized by well-demar-
cated, erythematous plaques with silvery scales (see Figure 2.2-8A) due to der-
mal inflammation and epidermal hyperplasia. Psoriasis can begin at any age.
History/PE
■ Lesions are classically found on the extensor surfaces, including the 
elbows and knees. Scalp and lumbosacral regions are often involved. Nails 
are frequently affected with pitting, “oil spots,” and onycholysis (lifting of 
the nail plate, see 
Figure 2.2-8B).
B
A
FIGURE 2.2-6.  Seborrheic dermatitis. (A) Seborrheic dermatitis (cradle cap) in an infant. 
Note the yellow, scaly crust present on the infant’s scalp with an area of erosion. (B) Photo-exac-
erbated seborrheic dermatitis, affecting the face only at sites of predilection for the seborrheic 
eruption. 
(Image A reproduced with permission from Tintinalli JE et al. Tintinalli’s Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study 
Guide, 7th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2011. Image B reproduced with permission from Goldsmith LA et al. Fitzpatrick’s 
Dermatology in General Medicine, 8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2012.)
FIGURE 2.2-7.  Stasis dermatitis. 
Venous ulceration with stasis dermatitis, 
edema, and varicosities. (Reproduced with 
permission from Goldsmith LA et al. Fitzpatrick’s Der-
matology in General Medicine, 8th ed. New York, NY: 
McGraw-Hill; 2012.)
61HIGH-YIELD FACTS INDERMATOLOGY
2019_02.02_Step2CK_Derm_10e_055-088.indd   61 8/28/18   12:32 PM
--- PAGE 79 ---
■ Lesions initially appear small but may become confluent and can be pro -
voked by local irritation or trauma (Koebner phenomenon). Some medi-
cations such as β-blockers, lithium, and ACE inhibitors (ACEIs), can 
worsen psoriatic lesions.
■ Up to 30% develop psoriatic arthritis (affecting small joints of the hands 
and feet).
Diagnosis
■ Characteristic exam findings and history are sufficient. Classical presenta -
tion: Auspitz sign (pinpoint bleeding when scale is scraped) overlying 
well-demarcated, erythematous plaques with silvery “micaceous” scale.
■ Perform a biopsy if diagnosis is uncertain. Histology shows a thickened 
epidermis, elongated rete ridges, an absent granular cell layer, preservation 
of nuclei in the stratum corneum (parakeratosis), and a sterile neutro-
philic infiltrate in the stratum corneum (Munro microabscesses).
trEatmEnt
■ Local disease:  Manage with topical steroids, calcipotriene (vitamin D 
derivative), and retinoids such as tazarotene or acitretin (vitamin A 
derivative).
■ Severe disease or presence of psoriatic arthritis: Methotrexate or anti–
tumour necrosis factor (TNF) biologics (etanercept, infliximab, adalim-
umab). Newer agents such as ustekinumab (anti-interleukin [IL]-12/23), 
secukinumab (anti-IL17), and UV light therapy can be used for extensive 
skin involvement (except in immunosuppressed patients who can develop 
skin cancer from UV light).
■ Before starting methotrexate or anti-TNF biologics, patients should at a 
minimum get a complete blood count (CBC), comprehensive metabolic 
panel (CMP), hepatitis panel, and a purified protein derivative (PPD)
.
URTICARIA (HIVES)
Results from the release of histamine and prostaglandins from mast cells in a 
type I hypersensitivity response. Sharply demarcated edematous plaques with 
 KEY FACT
If a rash involves the extensor surfaces, 
think psoriasis. If a rash involves the 
flexor surfaces, think atopic dermatitis.
 KEY FACT
“Sausage digits” and pencil-in-cup x-ray 
findings are suggestive of psoriatic 
arthritis.
FIGURE 2.2-8.  Psoriasis. (A) Skin changes. The classic sharply demarcated plaques with 
silvery scales are commonly located on the extensor surfaces (eg, elbows, knees). (B) Nail 
changes. Note the pitting, onycholysis, and “oil spots.” (Image A reproduced with permission from Wolff 
K et al. Fitzpatrick’s Color Atlas and Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology, 7th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2013. Image B repro-
duced with permission from Hurwitz RM. Pathology of the Skin: Atlas of Clinical-Pathological Correlation, 2nd ed. Stamford, CT: 
Appleton & Lange; 1998.)
B
A
62 HIGH-YIELD FACTS IN DERMATOLOGY
2019_02.02_Step2CK_Derm_10e_055-088.indd   62 8/28/18   12:32 PM
--- PAGE 80 ---
surrounding erythema (“wheal and flare”) are seen, with each lesion lasting 
< 24 hours. Can be acute or chronic (lasting > 6 weeks).
History/PE
■ Urticaria lesions (wheals) are reddish or white transient papules or plaques 
representing dermal edema. Lesions may be widespread and last a few 
hours.
■ In severe allergic reactions, extracutaneous manifestations can include 
tongue swelling, angioedema (deep, diffuse swelling often around the eyes 
and mouth; see 
Figure 2.2-9), asthma, GI symptoms, joint swelling, and 
fever.
■ Acute urticaria is a response to some often-unidentified trigger: food, drug, 
virus, insect bite, or physical stimulus (cold, heat, sun). Chronic urticaria 
is usually idiopathic.
Diagnosis
Characteristic exam findings and history are sufficient. Positive dermatogra-
phism (formation of wheals where the skin is stroked) may help. If in doubt, 
drawing a serum tryptase (coreleased with histamine from mast cells) can 
help clinch the diagnosis. It can often be difficult to determine the cause of 
urticaria.
trEatmEnt
Treat urticaria with systemic antihistamines. Anaphylaxis (rare) requires intra-
muscular epinephrine, antihistamines, IV fluids, and airway support.
DRUG ERUPTION
Drug eruptions can range from a mild morbilliform rash (most common, see 
Figure 2.2-10) to the rare but life-threatening toxic epidermal necrolysis 
(TEN). Maintain a high suspicion for a cutaneous drug reaction in patients 
who are hospitalized and develop rashes. Drugs can cause all four types of 
hypersensitivity reactions, and the same drug may cause different types of 
reactions in different persons.
A 23-year-old woman is seen for an 
itchy, linear rash on her right leg. 
She returned from a camping trip 4 
days ago and denies using any new 
makeup, clothing, or jewelry. What 
features of this presentation favor a 
contact dermatitis?
FIGURE 2.2-9.  Urticaria (hives) and angioedema. This patient has urticaria occurring on 
the face, neck, and shoulders with orbital angioedema. (Reproduced with permission from Goldsmith LA et 
al. Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General Medicine, 8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2012.)
63HIGH-YIELD FACTS INDERMATOLOGY
2019_02.02_Step2CK_Derm_10e_055-088.indd   63 8/28/18   12:32 PM
